Programming Assignment 3
R Programming
Introduction
Download the ?le ProgAssignment3-data.zip ?le containing the data for Programming Assignment 3 from the Coursera web site. Unzip the ?le in a directory that will serve as your working directory. When you start up R make sure to change your working directory to the directory where you unzipped the data.
The data for this assignment come from the Hospital Compare web site (http://hospitalcompare.hhs.gov) run by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. The purpose of the web site is to provide data and information about the quality of care at over 4,000 Medicare-certi?ed hospitals in the U.S. This dataset essentially covers all major U.S. hospitals. This dataset is used for a variety of purposes, including determining whether hospitals should be ?ned for not providing high quality care to patients (see http://goo.gl/jAXFX for some background on this particular topic).
The Hospital Compare web site contains a lot of data and we will only look at a small subset for this assignment. The zip ?le for this assignment contains three ?les • outcome-of-care-measures.csv: Contains information about 30-day mortality and readmission rates for heart attacks, heart failure, and pneumonia for over 4,000 hospitals. • hospital-data.csv: Contains information about each hospital. • Hospital_Revised_Flatfiles.pdf: Descriptions of the variables in each ?le (i.e the code book).
A description of the variables in each of the ?les is in the included PDF ?le named Hospital_Revised_Flatfiles.pdf. This document contains information about many other ?les that are not included with this programming assignment. You will want to focus on the variables for Number 19 (“Outcome of Care Measures.csv”) and Number 11 (“Hospital Data.csv”). You may ?nd it useful to print out this document (at least the pages for Tables 19 and 11) to have next to you while you work on this assignment. In particular, the numbers of the variables for each table indicate column indices in each table (i.e. “Hospital Name” is column 2 in the outcome-of-care-measures.csv ?le).
1 Plot the 30-day mortality rates for heart attack
Read the outcome data into R via the read.csv function and look at the ?rst few rows.
> outcome <- read.csv("outcome-of-care-measures.csv", colClasses = "character") > head(outcome)
There are many columns in this dataset. You can see how many by typing ncol(outcome) (you can see the number of rows with the nrow function). In addition, you can see the names of each column by typing names(outcome) (the names are also in the PDF document.
To make a simple histogram of the 30-day death rates from heart attack (column 11 in the outcome dataset), run
> outcome[, 11] <- as.numeric(outcome[, 11]) > ## You may get a warning about NAs being introduced; that is okay > hist(outcome[, 11])
1
Because we originally read the data in as character (by specifying colClasses = "character" we need to coerce the column to be numeric. You may get a warning about NAs being introduced but that is okay.
There is nothing to submit for this part.
2 Finding the best hospital in a state
Write a function called best that take two arguments: the 2-character abbreviated name of a state and an outcome name. The function reads the outcome-of-care-measures.csv ?le and returns a character vector with the name of the hospital that has the best (i.e. lowest) 30-day mortality for the speci?ed outcome in that state. The hospital name is the name provided in the Hospital.Name variable. The outcomes can be one of “heart attack”, “heart failure”, or “pneumonia”. Hospitals that do not have data on a particular outcome should be excluded from the set of hospitals when deciding the rankings.
Handling ties. If there is a tie for the best hospital for a given outcome, then the hospital names should be sorted in alphabetical order and the ?rst hospital in that set should be chosen (i.e. if hospitals “b”, “c”, and “f” are tied for best, then hospital “b” should be returned).
The function should use the following template.
best <- function(state, outcome) { ## Read outcome data
## Check that state and outcome are valid
## Return hospital name in that state with lowest 30-day death ## rate
}
The function should check the validity of its arguments. If an invalid state value is passed to best, the function should throw an error via the stop function with the exact message “invalid state”. If an invalid outcome value is passed to best, the function should throw an error via the stop function with the exact message “invalid outcome”.
Here is some sample output from the function.
> source("best.R") > best("TX", "heart attack")
[1] "CYPRESS FAIRBANKS MEDICAL CENTER"
> best("TX", "heart failure")
[1] "FORT DUNCAN MEDICAL CENTER"
> best("MD", "heart attack")
[1] "JOHNS HOPKINS HOSPITAL, THE"
> best("MD", "pneumonia")
[1] "GREATER BALTIMORE MEDICAL CENTER"
> best("BB", "heart attack") Error in best("BB", "heart attack") : invalid state > best("NY", "hert attack") Error in best("NY", "hert attack") : invalid outcome >
2
Save your code for this function to a ?le named best.R.
Use the submit script provided to submit your solution to this part. There are 3 tests that need to be passed for this part of the assignment.
3 Ranking hospitals by outcome in a state
Write a function called rankhospital that takes three arguments: the 2-character abbreviated name of a state (state), an outcome (outcome), and the ranking of a hospital in that state for that outcome (num). The function reads the outcome-of-care-measures.csv ?le and returns a character vector with the name of the hospital that has the ranking speci?ed by the num argument. For example, the call
rankhospital("MD", "heart failure", 5)
would return a character vector containing the name of the hospital with the 5th lowest 30-day death rate for heart failure. The num argument can take values “best”, “worst”, or an integer indicating the ranking (smaller numbers are better). If the number given by num is larger than the number of hospitals in that state, then the function should return NA. Hospitals that do not have data on a particular outcome should be excluded from the set of hospitals when deciding the rankings.
Handling ties. It may occur that multiple hospitals have the same 30-day mortality rate for a given cause of death. In those cases ties should be broken by using the hospital name. For example, in Texas (“TX”), the hospitals with lowest 30-day mortality rate for heart failure are shown here.
> head(texas)
Hospital.Name Rate Rank 3935 FORT DUNCAN MEDICAL CENTER 8.1 1 4085 TOMBALL REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 8.5 2 4103 CYPRESS FAIRBANKS MEDICAL CENTER 8.7 3 3954 DETAR HOSPITAL NAVARRO 8.7 4 4010 METHODIST HOSPITAL,THE 8.8 5 3962 MISSION REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 8.8 6
Note that Cypress Fairbanks Medical Center and Detar Hospital Navarro both have the same 30-day rate (8.7). However, because Cypress comes before Detar alphabetically, Cypress is ranked number 3 in this scheme and Detar is ranked number 4. One can use the order function to sort multiple vectors in this manner (i.e. where one vector is used to break ties in another vector).
The function should use the following template.
rankhospital <- function(state, outcome, num = "best") { ## Read outcome data
## Check that state and outcome are valid
## Return hospital name in that state with the given rank ## 30-day death rate
}
The function should check the validity of its arguments. If an invalid state value is passed to best, the function should throw an error via the stop function with the exact message “invalid state”. If an invalid outcome value is passed to best, the function should throw an error via the stop function with the exact message “invalid outcome”.
Here is some sample output from the function.
3
> source("rankhospital.R") > rankhospital("TX", "heart failure", 4)
[1] "DETAR HOSPITAL NAVARRO"
> rankhospital("MD", "heart attack", "worst")
[1] "HARFORD MEMORIAL HOSPITAL"
> rankhospital("MN", "heart attack", 5000)
[1] NA
Save your code for this function to a ?le named rankhospital.R.
Use the submit script provided to submit your solution to this part. There are 4 tests that need to be passed for this part of the assignment.
4 Ranking hospitals in all states
Write a function called rankall that takes two arguments: an outcome name (outcome) and a hospital ranking (num). The function reads the outcome-of-care-measures.csv ?le and returns a 2-column data frame containing the hospital in each state that has the ranking speci?ed in num. For example the function call rankall("heart attack", "best") would return a data frame containing the names of the hospitals that are the best in their respective states for 30-day heart attack death rates. The function should return a value for every state (some may be NA). The ?rst column in the data frame is named hospital, which contains the hospital name, and the second column is named state, which contains the 2-character abbreviation for the state name. Hospitals that do not have data on a particular outcome should be excluded from the set of hospitals when deciding the rankings.
Handling ties. The rankall function should handle ties in the 30-day mortality rates in the same way that the rankhospital function handles ties.
The function should use the following template.
rankall <- function(outcome, num = "best") { ## Read outcome data
## Check that state and outcome are valid
## For each state, find the hospital of the given rank
## Return a data frame with the hospital names and the ## (abbreviated) state name
}
NOTE: For the purpose of this part of the assignment (and for e?ciency), your function should NOT call the rankhospital function from the previous section.
The function should check the validity of its arguments. If an invalid outcome value is passed to rankall, the function should throw an error via the stop function with the exact message“invalid outcome”. The num variable can take values “best”, “worst”, or an integer indicating the ranking (smaller numbers are better). If the number given by num is larger than the number of hospitals in that state, then the function should return NA.
Here is some sample output from the function.
4
> source("rankall.R") > head(rankall("heart attack", 20), 10)
hospital state AK <NA> AK AL D W MCMILLAN MEMORIAL HOSPITAL AL AR ARKANSAS METHODIST MEDICAL CENTER AR AZ JOHN C LINCOLN DEER VALLEY HOSPITAL AZ CA SHERMAN OAKS HOSPITAL CA CO SKY RIDGE MEDICAL CENTER CO CT MIDSTATE MEDICAL CENTER CT DC <NA> DC DE <NA> DE FL SOUTH FLORIDA BAPTIST HOSPITAL FL
> tail(rankall("pneumonia", "worst"), 3)
hospital state WI MAYO CLINIC HEALTH SYSTEM - NORTHLAND, INC WI WV PLATEAU MEDICAL CENTER WV WY NORTH BIG HORN HOSPITAL DISTRICT WY
> tail(rankall("heart failure"), 10)
hospital state TN WELLMONT HAWKINS COUNTY MEMORIAL HOSPITAL TN TX FORT DUNCAN MEDICAL CENTER TX UT VA SALT LAKE CITY HEALTHCARE - GEORGE E. WAHLEN VA MEDICAL CENTER UT VA SENTARA POTOMAC HOSPITAL VA VI GOV JUAN F LUIS HOSPITAL & MEDICAL CTR VI VT SPRINGFIELD HOSPITAL VT WA HARBORVIEW MEDICAL CENTER WA WI AURORA ST LUKES MEDICAL CENTER WI WV FAIRMONT GENERAL HOSPITAL WV WY CHEYENNE VA MEDICAL CENTER WY
Save your code for this function to a ?le named rankall.R.
Use the submit script provided to submit your solution to this part. There are 3 tests that need to be passed for this part of the assignment.
5
provides the Medicare Spending per Patient ratio of hospitals compared to the national average.  1. Hospital Name: varchar (5) lists the name of the hospital. 2. Address 1: varchar (50) Lists the first line of the street address of the hospital. 3. Address 2: varchar (50) Lists the second line of the street address of the hospital. 4. Address 3: varchar (50) Lists the third line of the street address of the hospital. 5. City: varchar (28) Lists the city in which the hospital is located. 6. State: varchar (2) Lists the 2 letter State code in which the hospital is located. 7. ZIP Code: char (5) Lists the 5 digit numeric ZIP for the hospital. 8. County Name: char (15) Lists the county in which the hospital is located. 9. Phone Number: char (10) Lists the 10-digit numeric telephone number, including area code, for the Hospital. 10. Measure: varchar (45) lists measure title Spending per Hospital Patient with Medicare. 11. Spending per Hospital Patient with Medicare: varchar (3) 12. Footnote: (1) Lists the footnote value when appropriate. See the footnote table for the values.  17. Outcome of Care Measures – National.csv The Outcome of Care Measures – National.csv table contains three (3) fields   1. Condition: varchar (255) Lists the clinical condition. The values are:   • Heart Attack   • Heart Failure   • Pneumonia   2. Measure Name: varchar (100) Lists the measure names.   • Hospital 30-Day Death (Mortality) Rates for Heart Attack   • Hospital 30-Day Death (Mortality) Rates for Heart Failure   • Hospital 30-Day Death (Mortality) Rates for Pneumonia   • Hospital 30-Day Readmission Rates for Heart Attack   • Hospital 30-Day Readmission Rates for Heart Failure   • Hospital 30-Day Readmission Rates for Pneumonia   3. National Mortality/Readmission Rate: integer (2) The national risk-adjusted 30-Day Death (mortality) rate.    
18. Outcome of Care Measures – State.csv The Outcome of Care Measures – State.csv table contains twenty-five (25) fields. This table provides the total number of Hospitals in each state that are Better, No Different, and Worse than the U.S. National Rate for each measure. Additionally, this table provides the total number of hospitals where “Number of Cases is Too Small” to tell how well the hospital is performing.  1. State: char (2) Lists the alphabetic postal code used to identify each individual state. All fifty (50) states are listed, as well as:   a. DC = Washington, D.C.   b. GU = Guam   c. MP = Northern Mariana Islands   d. PR = Puerto Rico   e. VI = Virgin Islands   2. Number of Hospitals whose 30-day Death (Mortality) Rates from Heart Attack are Better 
Page Last Updated: July 19, 2012 
than U.S. National Rate: integer Lists the number of hospitals for each measure/category combination.   3. Number of Hospitals whose 30-Day Death (Mortality) Rates from Heart Attack are No different than U.S. National Rate: integer Lists the number of hospitals for each measure/category combination.   4. Number of Hospitals whose 30-Day Death (Mortality) Rates from Heart Attack are Worse than U.S. National Rate: integer Lists the number of hospitals for each measure/category combination.   5. Number of Hospitals whose 30-Day Death (Mortality) Rates from Heart Attack are Number of Cases Too Small: integer Lists the number of hospitals for each measure/category combination.   6. Number of Hospitals whose 30-Day Death (Mortality) Rates from Heart Failure are Better than U.S. National Rate: integer Lists the number of hospitals for each measure/category combination.   7. Number of Hospitals whose 30-Day Death (Mortality) Rates from Heart Failure are No different than U.S. National Rate: integer Lists the number of hospitals for each measure/category combination.   8. Number of Hospitals whose 30-Day Death (Mortality) Rates from Heart Failure are Worse than U.S. National Rate: integer Lists the number of hospitals for each measure/category combination.   9. Number of Hospitals whose 30-Day Death (Mortality) Rates from Heart Failure are Number of Cases Too Small: integer Lists the number of hospitals for each measure/category combination.   10. Number of Hospitals whose 30-Day Death (Mortality) Rates from Pneumonia are Better than U.S. National Rate: integer Lists the number of hospitals for each measure/category combination.   11. Number of Hospitals whose 30-Day Death (Mortality) Rates from Pneumonia are No different than U.S. National Rate: integer Lists the number of hospitals for each measure/category combination.   12. Number of Hospitals whose 30-Day Death (Mortality) Rates from Pneumonia are Worse than U.S. National Rate: integer Lists the number of hospitals for each measure/category combination.   13. Number of Hospitals whose 30-Day Death (Mortality) Rates from Pneumonia are Number of Cases Too Small: integer Lists the number of hospitals for each measure/category combination.   14. Number of Hospitals whose 30-Day Readmission Rates from Heart Attack are Better than U.S. National Rate: integer Lists the number of hospitals for each measure/category combination.   15. Number of Hospitals whose 30-Day Readmission Rates from Heart Attack are No different than U.S. National Rate: integer Lists the number of hospitals for each measure/category combination.   16. Number of Hospitals whose 30-Day Readmission Rates from Heart Attack are Worse than U.S. National Rate: integer Lists the number of hospitals for each measure/category combination.   
Page Last Updated: July 19, 2012 
17. Number of Hospitals whose 30-Day Readmission Rates from Heart Attack are Number of Cases Too Small: integer Lists the number of hospitals for each measure/category combination.   18. Number of Hospitals whose 30-Day Readmission Rates from Heart Failure are Better than U.S. National Rate: integer Lists the number of hospitals for each measure/category combination.   19. Number of Hospitals whose 30-Day Readmission Rates from Heart Failure are No different than U.S.: National Rate: integer Lists the number of hospitals for each measure/category combination.  20. Number of Hospitals whose 30-Day Readmission Rates from Heart Failure are Worse than U.S. National Rate: integer Lists the number of hospitals for each measure/category combination.   21. Number of Hospitals whose 30-Day Readmission Rates from Heart Failure are Number of Cases Too Small: integer Lists the number of hospitals for each measure/category combination.   22. Number of Hospitals whose 30-Day Readmission Rates from Pneumonia are Better than U.S. National Rate: integer Lists the number of hospitals for each measure/category combination.   23. Number of Hospitals whose 30-Day Readmission Rates from Pneumonia are No different than U.S. National Rate: integer Lists the number of hospitals for each measure/category combination.   24. Number of Hospitals whose 30-Day Readmission Rates from Pneumonia are Worse than U.S. National Rate: integer Lists the number of hospitals for each measure/category combination.   25. Number of Hospitals whose 30-Day Readmission Rates from Pneumonia are Number of Cases Too Small: integer Lists the number of hospitals for each measure/category combination.    
19. Outcome of Care Measures.csv The Outcome of Care Measures.csv table contains forty seven (47) fields. This table provides each hospital’s risk-adjusted 30-Day Death (mortality) and 30-Day Readmission category and rate.  1. Provider Number: varchar (6) Lists the hospitals by their provider identification number.   2. Hospital Name: varchar (50) Lists the name of the hospital.   3. Address 1: varchar (50) Lists the first line of the street address of the hospital.   4. Address 2: varchar (50) Lists the second line of the street address of the hospital.   5. Address 3: varchar (50) Lists the third line of the street address of the hospital.   6. City: varchar (28) Lists the city in which the hospital is located.   7. State: varchar (2) Lists the 2 letter State code in which the hospital is located.   8. ZIP Code: char (5) Lists the 5 digit numeric ZIP for the hospital.   9. County Name: char (15) Lists the county in which the hospital is located.   10. Phone Number: char (10) Lists the 10-digit numeric telephone number, including area code, for the Hospital.   11. Hospital 30-Day Death (Mortality) Rates from Heart Attack: Lists the risk adjusted rate (percentage) for each hospital.   12. Comparison to U.S. Rate - Hospital 30-Day Death (Mortality) Rates from Heart 
Page Last Updated: July 19, 2012 
Attack: varchar (50) Lists the mortality and readmission category in which the hospital falls. The values are:   • Better than U.S. National Average   • No Different than U.S. National Average   • Worse than U.S. National Average   • Number of Cases too Small*  13. Lower Mortality Estimate - Hospital 30-Day Death (Mortality) Rates from Heart Attack: Lists the lower bound (Interval Estimate) for each hospital’s risk-adjusted rate.   14. Upper Mortality Estimate - Hospital 30-Day Death (Mortality) Rates from Heart Attack: Lists the upper bound (Interval Estimate) for each hospital’s risk-adjusted rate.   15. Number of Patients - Hospital 30-Day Death (Mortality) Rates from Heart Attack: varchar (5) Lists the number of Medicare patients treated for Heart Attack by the Hospital.   16. Footnote - Hospital 30-Day Death (Mortality) Rates from Heart Attack: Lists the footnote value when appropriate, as related to the Heart Attack Outcome of Care at the hospital.   17. Hospital 30-Day Death (Mortality) Rates from Heart Failure: Lists the risk adjusted rate (percentage) for each hospital.   18. Comparison to U.S. Rate - Hospital 30-Day Death (Mortality) Rates from Heart Failure: varchar (50) Lists the mortality and readmission category in which the hospital falls. The values are:   a. Better than U.S. National Average   b. No Different than U.S. National Average   c.    Worse than U.S. National Average  d.   Number of Cases too Small*   19. Lower Mortality Estimate - Hospital 30-Day Death (Mortality) Rates from Heart Failure: Lists the lower bound (Interval Estimate) for each hospital’s risk-adjusted rate.   20. Upper Mortality Estimate - Hospital 30-Day Death (Mortality) Rates from Heart Failure: Lists the upper bound (Interval Estimate) for each hospital’s risk-adjusted rate.   21. Number of Patients - Hospital 30-Day Death (Mortality) Rates from Heart Failure: varchar (5) Lists the number of Medicare patients treated for Heart Failure by the Hospital.   22. Footnote - Hospital 30-Day Death (Mortality) Rates from Heart Failure: Lists the footnote value when appropriate, as related to the Heart Failure Outcome of Care at the hospital.   23. Hospital 30-Day Death (Mortality) Rates from Pneumonia: Lists the risk adjusted rate (percentage) for each hospital.   24. Comparison to U.S. Rate - Hospital 30-Day Death (Mortality) Rates from Pneumonia: varchar (50) Lists the mortality and readmission category in which the hospital falls. The values are:   •     Better than U.S. National Average   •     No Different than U.S. National Average   •     Worse than U.S. National Average   •     Number of Cases too Small*   25. Lower Mortality Estimate - Hospital 30-Day Death (Mortality) Rates from Pneumonia: Lists the lower bound (Interval Estimate) for each hospital’s risk-adjusted rate.   
Page Last Updated: July 19, 2012 
26. Upper Mortality Estimate - Hospital 30-Day Death (Mortality) Rates from Pneumonia: Lists the upper bound (Interval Estimate) for each hospital’s risk-adjusted rate.   27. Number of Patients - Hospital 30-Day Death (Mortality) Rates from Pneumonia: varchar (5) Lists the number of Medicare patients treated for Pneumonia by the Hospital.   28. Footnote - Hospital 30-Day Death (Mortality) Rates from Pneumonia: Lists the footnote value when appropriate, as related to the Pneumonia Outcome of Care at the hospital.   29. Hospital 30-Day Readmission Rates from Heart Attack: Lists the risk adjusted rate (percentage) for each hospital.   30. Comparison to U.S. Rate - Hospital 30-Day Readmission Rates from Heart Attack: varchar (50) Lists the mortality and readmission category in which the hospital falls. The values are:  •     Better than U.S. National Average   • No Different than U.S. National Average   • Worse than U.S. National Average   • Number of Cases too Small*   32. Lower Readmission Estimate - Hospital 30-Day Readmission Rates from Heart Attack: Lists the lower bound (Interval Estimate) for each hospital’s risk-adjusted rate.   33. Upper Readmission Estimate - Hospital 30-Day Readmission Rates from Heart Attack: Lists the upper bound (Interval Estimate) for each hospital’s risk-adjusted rate.   34. Number of Patients - Hospital 30-Day Readmission Rates from Heart Attack: varchar   (5)  Lists the number of Medicare patients treated for Heart Attack.   35. Footnote - Hospital 30-Day Readmission Rates from Heart Attack: Lists the footnote value when appropriate, as related to the Heart Attack Outcome of Care at the hospital.   36. Hospital 30-Day Readmission Rates from Heart Failure: Lists the risk adjusted rate (percentage) for each hospital.   37. Comparison to U.S. Rate - Hospital 30-Day Readmission Rates from Heart Failure: varchar (50) Lists the mortality and readmission category in which the hospital falls. The values are:   • Better than U.S. National Average   • No Different than U.S. National Average   • Worse than U.S. National Average   • Number of Cases too Small*   38. Lower Readmission Estimate - Hospital 30-Day Readmission Rates from Heart Failure: Lists the lower bound (Interval Estimate) for each hospital’s risk-adjusted rate.   39. Upper Readmission Estimate - Hospital 30-Day Readmission Rates from Heart Failure: Lists the upper bound (Interval Estimate) for each hospital’s risk-adjusted rate.   40. Number of Patients - Hospital 30-Day Readmission Rates from Heart Failure: varchar   (5)  Lists the number of Medicare patients treated for Heart Failure.   41. Footnote - Hospital 30-Day Readmission Rates from Heart Failure: Lists the footnote value when appropriate, as related to the Heart Failure Outcome of Care at the hospital.   42. Hospital 30-Day Readmission Rates from Pneumonia: Lists the risk adjusted rate (percentage) for each hospital.   43. Comparison to U.S. Rate - Hospital 30-Day Readmission Rates from Pneumonia: varchar (50) Lists the mortality and readmission category in which the hospital falls. The values are:   
Page Last Updated: July 19, 2012 
• Better than U.S. National Average   • No Different than U.S. National Average   • Worse than U.S. National Average   • Number of Cases too Small*   44. Lower Readmission Estimate - Hospital 30-Day Readmission Rates from Pneumonia: Lists the lower bound (Interval Estimate) for each hospital’s risk-adjusted rate.   45. Upper Readmission Estimate - Hospital 30-Day Readmission Rates from Pneumonia: Lists the upper bound (Interval Estimate) for each hospital’s risk-adjusted rate.   46. Number of Patients - Hospital 30-Day Readmission Rates from Pneumonia: varchar   (5)  Lists the number of Medicare patients treated for Pneumonia.   47. Footnote - Hospital 30-Day Readmission Rates from Pneumonia: Lists the footnote value when appropriate, as related to the Pneumonia Outcome of Care at the hospital.    
20. Outpatient Imaging Efficiency Measures – National.csv  The Outpatient Imaging Efficiency Measures.csv table contains two (2) fields. This table provides the quality measure scores for each hospital that reported information.  1. Measure Name: varchar (100) Lists the measure names   2. Score varchar (4) Lists the score for the measure.    
21. Outpatient Imaging Efficiency Measures – State.csv  The Outpatient Imaging Efficiency Measures.csv table contains seven (7) fields. This table provides the quality measure scores for each state.  1. State: char (2) Lists the alphabetic postal code used to identify each individual state. All fifty (50) states are listed, as well as:   a. DC = Washington, D.C.   b. GU = Guam   c. MP = Northern Mariana Islands   d. PR = Puerto Rico   e. VI = Virgin Islands   2. Outpatients with low back pain who had an MRI without trying recommended treatments first such as physical therapy.: varchar (4) Lists the score for the measure corresponding to each state.   3. Outpatients who had a follow-up mammogram or ultrasound within 45 days after a screening mammogram.: varchar (4) Lists the score for the measure corresponding to each state.   4. Outpatient CT scans of the abdomen that were combination (double) scans.: varchar   (4) Lists the score for the measure corresponding to each state.   5. Outpatient CT scans of the chest that were combination (double) scans..: varchar (4) Lists the score for the measure corresponding to each state. 6. Outpatients who got cardiac imaging stress tests before low-risk outpatient surgery…: varchar (4) Lists the score for the measure corresponding to each state 7.  Outpatients with brain CT scans who got a sinus CT scan at the same time…: varchar  (4) Lists the score for the measure corresponding to each state  22. Outpatient Imaging Efficiency Measures.csv The Outpatient Imaging Efficiency Measures.csv table contains twenty-six (26) fields. This table 
Page Last Updated: July 19, 2012 
provides the quality measure scores for each hospital that reported information.  1. Provider Number: varchar (6) Lists the hospitals by their provider identification number.   2. Hospital Name: varchar (50) Lists the name of the hospital.   3. Address 1: varchar (50) Lists the first line of the street address of the hospital.   4. Address 2: varchar (50) Lists the second line of the street address of the hospital.   5. Address 3: varchar (50) Lists the third line of the street address of the hospital.   6. City: varchar (28) Lists the city in which the hospital is located.   7. State: varchar (2) Lists the 2 letter State code in which the hospital is located.   8. ZIP Code: char (5) Lists the 5 digit numeric ZIP for the hospital.   9. County Name: char (15) Lists the county in which the hospital is located.   10. Phone Number: char (10) Lists the 10-digit numeric telephone number, including area code, for the Hospital.   11. Outpatients with low back pain who had an MRI without trying recommended treatments first such as physical therapy.: varchar (4) Lists the score for the measure corresponding to the hospital selected.   12. Number of Patients: varchar (12) Lists the patient sample size for each measure that the hospital submitted.  13. Footnote: (1) Lists the footnote value when appropriate. See the footnote table for the values.   14. Outpatients who had a follow-up mammogram or ultrasound within 45 days after a screening mammogram.: varchar (4) Lists the score for the measure corresponding to the hospital selected.   15. Number of Patients: varchar (12) Lists the patient sample size for each measure that the hospital submitted.   16. Footnote: (1) Lists the footnote value when appropriate. See the footnote table for the values.   17. Outpatient CT scans of the abdomen that were combination (double) scans.: varchar (4) Lists the score for the measure corresponding to the hospital selected.   18. Number of Patients: varchar (12) Lists the patient sample size for each measure that the hospital submitted.   19. Footnote: (1) Lists the footnote value when appropriate. See the footnote table for the values.   20. Outpatient CT scans of the chest that were combination (double) scans..: varchar (4) Lists the score for the measure corresponding to the hospital selected.   21. Number of Patients: varchar (12) Lists the patient sample size for each measure that the hospital submitted.   22. Footnote: (1) Lists the footnote value when appropriate. See the footnote table for the values.  23. Outpatients who got cardiac imaging stress tests before low-risk outpatient surgery…: varchar (4) Lists the score for the measure corresponding to each state 24. Footnote: (1) Lists the footnote value when appropriate. See the footnote table for the values. 25. Outpatients with brain CT scans who got a sinus CT scan at the same time…: varchar  (4) Lists the score for the measure corresponding to each state 26. Footnote: (1) Lists the footnote value when appropriate. See the footnote table for the values  
Page Last Updated: July 19, 2012 
23. Process of Care Measures – Children.csv The Process of Care Measures – Children.csv table contains nineteen (19) fields. This table provides the quality measure scores for each hospital that reported information.  1. Provider Number: varchar (6) Lists the hospitals by their provider identification number.   2. Hospital Name: varchar (50) Lists the name of the hospital.   3. Address 1: varchar (50) Lists the first line of the street address of the hospital.   4. Address 2: varchar (50) Lists the second line of the street address of the hospital.   5. Address 3: varchar (50) Lists the third line of the street address of the hospital.   6. City: varchar (28) Lists the city in which the hospital is located.   7. State: varchar (2) Lists the 2 letter State code in which the hospital is located.   8. ZIP Code: char (5) Lists the 5 digit numeric ZIP for the hospital.   9. County Name: char (15) Lists the county in which the hospital is located.   10. Phone Number: char (10) Lists the 10-digit numeric telephone number, including area code, for the Hospital.  11. Percent of Children Who Received Reliever Medication While Hospitalized for Asthma: varchar (4) Lists the score (percentage) for the measure corresponding to the hospital selected.   12. Number of Patients: varchar (12) Lists the patient sample size for each measure that the hospital submitted.   13. Footnote: (1) Lists the footnote value when appropriate. See the footnote table for the values.   14. Percent of Children Who Received Systemic Corticosteroid Medication While Hospitalized for Asthma: varchar (4) Lists the score (percentage) for the measure corresponding to the hospital selected.   15. Number of Patients: varchar (12) Lists the patient sample size for each measure that the hospital submitted.   16. Footnote: (1) Lists the footnote value when appropriate. See the footnote table for the values.   17. Percent of Children and their Caregivers Who Received a Home Management Plan of Care Document While Hospitalized for Asthma: varchar (4) Lists the score (percentage) for the measure corresponding to the hospital selected.   18. Number of Patients: varchar (12) Lists the patient sample size for each measure that the hospital submitted.   19. Footnote: (1) Lists the footnote value when appropriate. See the footnote table for the values.    
24. Process of Care Measures – Heart Attack.csv The Process of Care Measures – Heart Attack.csv table contains forty-nine (49) fields. This table provides the quality measure scores for each hospital that reported information.  1. Provider Number: varchar (6) Lists the hospitals by their provider identification number.   2. Hospital Name: varchar (50) Lists the name of the hospital.   3. Address 1: varchar (50) Lists the first line of the street address of the hospital.   4. Address 2: varchar (50) Lists the second line of the street address of the hospital.   5. Address 3: varchar (50) Lists the third line of the street address of the hospital.   6. City: varchar (28) Lists the city in which the hospital is located.   7. State: varchar (2) Lists the 2 letter State code in which the hospital is located.   
Page Last Updated: July 19, 2012 
8. ZIP Code: char (5) Lists the 5 digit numeric ZIP for the hospital.   9. County Name: char (15) Lists the county in which the hospital is located.   10. Phone Number: char (10) Lists the 10-digit numeric telephone number, including area code, for the Hospital.   11. Percent of Heart Attack Patients Given Aspirin at Arrival: Lists the score (percentage) for the measure corresponding to the hospital selected.   12. Number of Patients: varchar (12) Lists the patient sample size for each measure that the hospital submitted.   13. Footnote: (1) Lists the footnote value when appropriate. See the footnote table for the values.   14. Percent of Heart Attack Patients Given Aspirin at Discharge: Lists the score (percentage) for the measure corresponding to the hospital selected.   15. Number of Patients: varchar (12) Lists the patient sample size for each measure that the hospital submitted.   16. Footnote: (1) Lists the footnote value when appropriate. See the footnote table for the values.   17. Percent of Heart Attack Patients Given ACE Inhibitor or ARB for Left Ventricular Systolic Dysfunction (LVSD): Lists the score (percentage) for the measure corresponding to the hospital selected.   18. Number of Patients: varchar (12) Lists the patient sample size for each measure that the hospital submitted. 19. Footnote: (1) Lists the footnote value when appropriate. See the footnote table for the values.   20. Percent of Heart Attack Patients Given Beta Blocker at Discharge: Lists the score (percentage) for the measure corresponding to the hospital selected.   21. Number of Patients: varchar (12) Lists the patient sample size for each measure that the hospital submitted.   22. Footnote: (1) Lists the footnote value when appropriate. See the footnote table for the values.   23. Percent of Heart Attack Patients Given Smoking Cessation Advice/Counseling: Lists the score (percentage) for the measure corresponding to the hospital selected.   24. Number of Patients: varchar (12) Lists the patient sample size for each measure that the hospital submitted.   25. Footnote: (1) Lists the footnote value when appropriate. See the footnote table for the values.   26. Percent of Heart Attack Patients Given Fibrinolytic Medication Within 30 Minutes Of Arrival: Lists the score (percentage) for the measure corresponding to the hospital selected.   27. Number of Patients: varchar (12) Lists the patient sample size for each measure that the hospital submitted.   28. Footnote: (1) Lists the footnote value when appropriate. See the footnote table for the values.   29. Percent of Heart Attack Patients Given PCI Within 90 Minutes Of Arrival: Lists the score (percentage) for the measure corresponding to the hospital selected.   30. Number of Patients: varchar (12) Lists the patient sample size for each measure that the hospital submitted.   31. Footnote: (1) Lists the footnote value when appropriate. See the footnote table for the 
Page Last Updated: July 19, 2012 
values.   32. Average number of minutes before outpatients with chest pain or possible heart attack got an ECG: Lists the score (minutes) for the measure corresponding to the hospital selected.   33. Number of Patients: varchar (12) Lists the patient sample size for each measure that the hospital submitted.   34. Footnote: (1) Lists the footnote value when appropriate. See the footnote table for the values.   35. Average number of minutes before outpatients with chest pain or possible heart attack were transferred to another hospital: Lists the score (minutes) for the measure corresponding to the hospital selected.   36. Number of Patients: varchar (12) Lists the patient sample size for each measure that the hospital submitted.   37. Footnote: (1) Lists the footnote value when appropriate. See the footnote table for the values.   38. Median Time to Fibrinolysis: Lists the score (minutes) for the measure corresponding to the hospital selected.   39. Number of Patients: varchar (12) Lists the patient sample size for each measure that the hospital submitted.   40. Footnote: (1) Lists the footnote value when appropriate. See the footnote table for the values.   41. Outpatients with chest pain or possible heart attack who got aspirin within 24 hours of arrival: Lists the score for the measure corresponding to the hospital selected.   42. Number of Patients: varchar (12) Lists the patient sample size for each measure that the hospital submitted.   43. Footnote: (1) Lists the footnote value when appropriate. See the footnote table for the values.   44. Outpatients with chest pain or possible heart attack who got drugs to break up blood clots within 30 minutes of arrival: Lists the score for the measure corresponding to the hospital selected.   45. Number of Patients: varchar (12) Lists the patient sample size for each measure that the hospital submitted.  46. Footnote: (1) Lists the footnote value when appropriate. See the footnote table for the values. 47. Heart Attack Patients Given a Prescription for a Statin at Discharge: Lists the number (percent) of patients that received a Statin upon discharge from the hospital. 48. Number of Patients: varchar (12) Lists the patient sample size for each measure that the hospital submitted.  49. Footnote: (1) Lists the footnote value when appropriate. See the footnote table for the values.   
25. Process of Care Measures – Heart Failure.csv  The Process of Care Measures – Heart Failure.csv table contains twenty-two (22) fields. This table provides the quality measure scores for each hospital that reported information.  1. Provider Number: varchar (6) Lists the hospitals by their provider identification number.   2. Hospital Name: varchar (50) Lists the name of the hospital.   3. Address 1: varchar (50) Lists the first line of the street address of the hospital.   
Page Last Updated: July 19, 2012 
4. Address 2: varchar (50) Lists the second line of the street address of the hospital.   5. Address 3: varchar (50) Lists the third line of the street address of the hospital.   6. City: varchar (28) Lists the city in which the hospital is located.   7. State: varchar (2) Lists the 2 letter State code in which the hospital is located.   8. ZIP Code: char (5) Lists the 5 digit numeric ZIP for the hospital.   9. County Name: char (15) Lists the county in which the hospital is located.   10. Phone Number: char (10) Lists the 10-digit numeric telephone number, including area code, for the Hospital.   11. Percent of Heart Failure Patients Given an Evaluation of Left Ventricular Systolic (LVS) Function: Lists the score (percentage) for the measure corresponding to the hospital selected.   12. Number of Patients: varchar (12) Lists the patient sample size for each measure that the hospital submitted.   13. Footnote: (1) Lists the footnote value when appropriate. See the footnote table for the values.   14. Percent of Heart Failure Patients Given ACE Inhibitor or ARB for Left Ventricular Systolic Dysfunction (LVSD): Lists the score (percentage) for the measure corresponding to the hospital selected.   15. Number of Patients: varchar (12) Lists the patient sample size for each measure that the hospital submitted.   16. Footnote: (1) Lists the footnote value when appropriate. See the footnote table for the values.   17. Percent of Heart Failure Patients Given Discharge Instructions: Lists the score (percentage) for the measure corresponding to the hospital selected.   18. Number of Patients: varchar (12) Lists the patient sample size for each measure that the hospital submitted.   19. Footnote: (1) Lists the footnote value when appropriate. See the footnote table for the values.   20. Percent of Heart Failure Patients Given Smoking Cessation Advice/Counseling: Lists the score (percentage) for the measure corresponding to the hospital selected.   21. Number of Patients: varchar (12) Lists the patient sample size for each measure that the hospital submitted.   22. Footnote: (1) Lists the footnote value when appropriate. See the footnote table for the values.    
26. Process of Care Measures – National.csv  1. Condition: (29) Lists the clinical condition. The values are:   • Heart Attack   • Heart Failure   • Pneumonia   • Surgical Care Improvement   • Children’s Asthma Care   2. Category   • Children’s Asthma Care • Heart Attack   • Heart Failure   
Page Last Updated: July 19, 2012 
• Pneumonia   • Surgical Infection Prevention   4. Measure Name:   • Top 10% of Hospitals submitting data scored equal to or higher than:   • National Average of Hospitals submitting data:   5. National Mortality/Readmission Rate: (4) Lists the top 10% and national score for each measure.    
27. Process of Care Measures – Pneumonia.csv The Process of Care Measures – Pneumonia.csv table contains twenty-eight (28) fields. This table provides the quality measure scores for each hospital that reported information.  1. Provider Number: varchar (6) Lists the hospitals by their provider identification number.   2. Hospital Name: varchar (50) Lists the name of the hospital.   3. Address 1: varchar (50) Lists the first line of the street address of the hospital.   4. Address 2: varchar (50) Lists the second line of the street address of the hospital.  5. Address 3: varchar (50) Lists the third line of the street address of the hospital.   6. City: varchar (28) Lists the city in which the hospital is located.   7. State: varchar (2) Lists the 2 letter State code in which the hospital is located.   8. ZIP Code: char (5) Lists the 5 digit numeric ZIP for the hospital.   9. County Name: char (15) Lists the county in which the hospital is located.   10. Phone Number: char (10) Lists the 10-digit numeric telephone number, including area code, for the Hospital.   11. Percent of Pneumonia Patients Assessed and Given Pneumococcal Vaccination: Lists the score (percentage) for the measure corresponding to the hospital selected.   12. Number of Patients: varchar (12) Lists the patient sample size for each measure that the hospital submitted.   13. Footnote: (1) Lists the footnote value when appropriate. See the footnote table for the values.   14. Percent of Pneumonia Patients Given Initial Antibiotic(s) within 6 Hours After Arrival: Lists the score (percentage) for the measure corresponding to the hospital selected.   15. Number of Patients: varchar (12) Lists the patient sample size for each measure that the hospital submitted.   16. Footnote: (1) Lists the footnote value when appropriate. See the footnote table for the values.   17. Percent of Pneumonia Patients Whose Initial ER Blood Culture Was Performed Prior To Administration Of First Dose Of Antibiotics: Lists the score (percentage) for the measure corresponding to the hospital selected.   18. Number of Patients: varchar (12) Lists the patient sample size for each measure that the hospital submitted.   19. Footnote: (1) Lists the footnote value when appropriate. See the footnote table for the values.   20. Percent of Pneumonia Patients Given Smoking Cessation Advice/Counseling: Lists the score (percentage) for the measure corresponding to the hospital selected.   21. Number of Patients: varchar (12) Lists the patient sample size for each measure that the hospital submitted.   22. Footnote: (1) Lists the footnote value when appropriate. See the footnote table for the 
Page Last Updated: July 19, 2012 
values.   23. Percent of Pneumonia Patients Given the Most Appropriate Initial Antibiotic(s): Lists the score (percentage) for the measure corresponding to the hospital selected.   24. Number of Patients: varchar (12) Lists the patient sample size for each measure that the hospital submitted.   25. Footnote: (1) Lists the footnote value when appropriate. See the footnote table for the values.   26. Percent of Pneumonia Patients Assessed and Given Influenza Vaccination: Lists the score (percentage) for the measure corresponding to the hospital selected.   27. Number of Patients: varchar (12) Lists the patient sample size for each measure that the hospital submitted.   28. Footnote: (1) Lists the footnote value when appropriate. See the footnote table for the values.    
28. Process of Care Measures – SCIP.csv  The Process of Care Measures – Surgery.csv table contains thirty-seven (37) fields. This table provides the quality measure scores for each hospital that reported information.  1. Provider Number: varchar (6) Lists the hospitals by their provider identification number.   2. Hospital Name: varchar (50) Lists the name of the hospital.   3. Address 1: varchar (50) Lists the first line of the street address of the hospital.   4. Address 2: varchar (50) Lists the second line of the street address of the hospital. 5. Address 3: varchar (50) Lists the third line of the street address of the hospital.   6. City: varchar (28) Lists the city in which the hospital is located.   7. State: varchar (2) Lists the 2 letter State code in which the hospital is located.   8. ZIP Code: char (5) Lists the 5 digit numeric ZIP for the hospital.   9. County Name: char (15) Lists the county in which the hospital is located.   10. Phone Number: char (10) Lists the 10-digit numeric telephone number, including area code, for the Hospital.   11. Percent of Surgery Patients given an antibiotic at the right time (within one hour before surgery) to help prevent infection: Lists the score (percentage) for the measure corresponding to the hospital selected.   12. Number of Patients: varchar (12) Lists the patient sample size for each measure that the hospital submitted.   13. Footnote: (1) Lists the footnote value when appropriate. See the footnote table for the values.   14. Percent of Surgery Patients whose preventive antibiotics were stopped at the right time (within 24 hours after surgery): Lists the score (percentage) for the measure corresponding to the hospital selected.   15. Number of Patients: varchar (12) Lists the patient sample size for each measure that the hospital submitted.   16. Footnote: (1) Lists the footnote value when appropriate. See the footnote table for the values.   17. Percent of Surgery Patients who were given the right kind of antibiotic to help prevent infection: Lists the score (percentage) for the measure corresponding to the hospital selected.   18. Number of Patients: varchar (12) Lists the patient sample size for each measure that the 
Page Last Updated: July 19, 2012 
hospital submitted.   19. Footnote: (1) Lists the footnote value when appropriate. See the footnote table for the values.   20. Percent of Surgery Patients who got treatment at right time (within 24 hours before or after surgery) to help prevent blood clot: Lists the score (percentage) for the measure corresponding to the hospital selected.   21. Number of Patients: varchar (12) Lists the patient sample size for each measure that the hospital submitted.   22. Footnote: (1) Lists the footnote value when appropriate. See the footnote table for the values.   23. Percent of Surgery Patients whose doctors ordered treatments to prevent blood clots after certain types of surgeries: Lists the score (percentage) for the measure corresponding to the hospital selected.   24. Number of Patients: varchar (12) Lists the patient sample size for each measure that the hospital submitted.  25. Footnote: (1) Lists the footnote value when appropriate. See the footnote table for the values.   26. Percent of all Heart Surgery Patients whose blood sugar is kept under good control in the days right after surgery: Lists the score (percentage) for the measure corresponding to the hospital selected.   27. Number of Patients: varchar (12) Lists the patient sample size for each measure that the hospital submitted.   28. Footnote: (1) Lists the footnote value when appropriate. See the footnote table for the values.   29. Percent of Surgery Patients needing hair removed from the surgical area before surgery who had hair removed using a safer method: Lists the score (percentage) for the measure corresponding to the hospital selected.   30. Number of Patients: varchar (12) Lists the patient sample size for each measure that the hospital submitted.   31. Footnote: (1) Lists the footnote value when appropriate. See the footnote table for the values.  32. Percent of Surgery Patients who were taking beta blockers before coming to the hospital, who were kept on the beta blockers: Lists the score (percentage) for the measure corresponding to the hospital selected.   33. Number of Patients: varchar (12) Lists the patient sample size for each measure that the hospital submitted.   34. Footnote: (1) Lists the footnote value when appropriate. See the footnote table for the values.  35. Patients having surgery who were actively warmed in the operating room or whose body temperature was near normal by the end of surgery: Lists the score (percentage) for the measure corresponding to the hospital selected. 36. Number of Patients: varchar (12) Lists the patient sample size for each measure that the hospital submitted.   37. Footnote: (1) Lists the footnote value when appropriate. See the footnote table for the values.   29. Process of Care Measures – State.csv The Process of Care Measures – State.csv table contains thirty-six (36) fields. This table provides the State average for each hospital process of care quality measure. 
Page Last Updated: July 19, 2012  
1. State: char (2) Lists the alphabetic postal code used to identify each individual state. All fifty (50) states are listed, as well as:   • DC = Washington, D.C.   • GU = Guam   • MP = Northern Mariana Islands   • PR = Puerto Rico   • VI = Virgin Islands   2. Percent of Heart Attack Patients Given Aspirin at Arrival: char (3) Lists the measure average for each State.   3. Percent of Heart Attack Patients Given Aspirin at Discharge: char (3) Lists the measure average for each State.   4. Percent of Heart Attack Patients Given ACE Inhibitor or ARB for Left Ventricular Systolic Dysfunction (LVSD) : char (3) Lists the measure average for each State.   5. Percent of Heart Attack Patients Given Beta Blocker at Discharge: char (3) Lists the measure average for each State.   6. Percent of Heart Attack Patients Given Smoking Cessation Advice/Counseling: char   (3) Lists the measure average for each State.   7. Percent of Heart Attack Patients Given Fibrinolytic Medication Within 30 Minutes Of Arrival: char (3) Lists the measure average for each State.   8. Percent of Heart Attack Patients Given PCI Within 90 Minutes Of Arrival: char (3) Lists the measure average for each State.   9. Percent of Heart Failure Patients Given an Evaluation of Left Ventricular Systolic (LVS) Function: char (3) Lists the measure average for each State.   10. Percent of Heart Failure Patients Given ACE Inhibitor or ARB for Left Ventricular Systolic Dysfunction (LVSD): char (3) Lists the measure average for each State.   11. Percent of Heart Failure Patients Given Discharge Instructions: char (3) Lists the measure average for each State.   12. Percent of Heart Failure Patients Given Smoking Cessation Advice/Counseling: char (3) Lists the measure average for each State.   13. Percent of Pneumonia Patients Assessed and Given Pneumococcal Vaccination: char (3) Lists the measure average for each State.   14. Percent of Pneumonia Patients Given Initial Antibiotic(s) within 6 Hours After Arrival: char (3) Lists the measure average for each State.   15. Percent of Pneumonia Patients Whose Initial ER Blood Culture Was Performed Prior To Administration Of First Dose Of Antibiotics: char (3) Lists the measure average for each State.   16. Percent of Pneumonia Patients Given Smoking Cessation Advice/Counseling: char (3) Lists the measure average for each State.   17. Percent of Pneumonia Patients Given the Most Appropriate Initial Antibiotic(s) : char (3) Lists the measure average for each State.   18. Percent of Pneumonia Patients Assessed and Given Influenza Vaccination: char (3) Lists the measure average for each State.   19. Percent of Surgery Patients given an antibiotic at the right time (within one hour before surgery) to help prevent infection: char (3) Lists the measure average for each State.   20. Percent of Surgery Patients whose preventive antibiotics were stopped at the right time 
Page Last Updated: July 19, 2012 
(within  24 hours after surgery) : char (3) Lists the measure average for each State.   21. Percent of Surgery Patients who were given the right kind of antibiotic to help prevent infection: char (3) Lists the measure average for each State.   22. Percent of Surgery Patients who got treatment at right time (within 24 hours before or after surgery) to help prevent blood clot: char (3) Lists the measure average for each State.   23. Percent of Surgery Patients whose doctors ordered treatments to prevent blood clots after certain types of surgeries: char (3) Lists the measure average for each State.   24. Percent of all Heart Surgery Patients whose blood sugar is kept under good control in the days right after surgery: char (3) Lists the measure average for each State.   25. Percent of Surgery Patients needing hair removed from the surgical area before surgery who had hair removed using a safer method: char (3) Lists the measure average for each State.   26. Percent of Surgery Patients who were taking beta blockers before coming to the hospital, who were kept on the beta blockers: char (3) Lists the measure average for each State.   27. Percent of Children Who Received Reliever Medication While Hospitalized for Asthma: char (3) Lists the measure average for each State.   28. Percent of Children Who Received Systemic Corticosteroid Medication While Hospitalized for Asthma: char (3) Lists the measure average for each State.   29. Percent of Children and their Caregivers Who Received a Home Management Plan of Care Document While Hospitalized for Asthma: char (3) Lists the measure average for each State.   30. Average number of minutes before outpatients with chest pain or possible heart attack got an ECG: char (3) Lists the measure average for each State.   31. Average number of minutes before outpatients with chest pain or possible heart attack were transferred to another hospital: char (3) Lists the measure average for each State.   32. Median Time to Fibrinolysis: char (3) Lists the measure average for each State.   33. Median Outpatients with chest pain or possible heart attack who got aspirin within 24 hours of arrival: char (3) Lists the measure average for each State.   34. Outpatients with chest pain or possible heart attack who got drugs to break up blood clots within 30 minutes of arrival: char (3) Lists the measure average for each State. 35. Heart Attack Patients Given a Prescription for a Statin at Discharge: char (3) Lists the measure average for each state. 36. Patients having surgery who were actively warmed in the operating room or whose body temperature was near normal: char (3) Lists the measure average for each state.   
29. Structural Measures.csv The Structural Measures.csv table contains twelve (12) fields. 1. Provider Number: varchar (6) Lists the hospitals by their provider identification number.   2. Hospital Name: varchar (50) Lists the name of the hospital.   3. Address 1: varchar (50) Lists the first line of the street address of the hospital.   4. Address 2: varchar (50) Lists the second line of the street address of the hospital.   
Page Last Updated: July 19, 2012 
5. Address 3: varchar (50) Lists the third line of the street address of the hospital.   6. City: varchar (28) Lists the city in which the hospital is located.   7. State: varchar (2) Lists the 2 letter State code in which the hospital is located.   8. ZIP Code: char (5) Lists the 5 digit numeric ZIP for the hospital.   9. County Name: char (15) Lists the county in which the hospital is located.   10. Phone Number: char (10) Lists the 10-digit numeric telephone number, including area code, for the Hospital.   11. Measure Name: varchar (255) Lists the measure names, see chart at the end of this document.   12. Measure Response: varchar (50) Lists the cardiac surgery registry participation reponses. The values are:   • Yes   • No   • Does not have a Cardiac Surgery Program   • Not Available    
  Process of Care Quality Measures Chart Total Measures = 37  provides the Medicare Spending per Patient ratio of hospitals compared to the national average.  1. Hospital Name: varchar (5) lists the name of the hospital. 2. Address 1: varchar (50) Lists the first line of the street address of the hospital. 3. Address 2: varchar (50) Lists the second line of the street address of the hospital. 4. Address 3: varchar (50) Lists the third line of the street address of the hospital. 5. City: varchar (28) Lists the city in which the hospital is located. 6. State: varchar (2) Lists the 2 letter State code in which the hospital is located. 7. ZIP Code: char (5) Lists the 5 digit numeric ZIP for the hospital. 8. County Name: char (15) Lists the county in which the hospital is located. 9. Phone Number: char (10) Lists the 10-digit numeric telephone number, including area code, for the Hospital. 10. Measure: varchar (45) lists measure title Spending per Hospital Patient with Medicare. 11. Spending per Hospital Patient with Medicare: varchar (3) 12. Footnote: (1) Lists the footnote value when appropriate. See the footnote table for the values.  17. Outcome of Care Measures – National.csv The Outcome of Care Measures – National.csv table contains three (3) fields   1. Condition: varchar (255) Lists the clinical condition. The values are:   • Heart Attack   • Heart Failure   • Pneumonia   2. Measure Name: varchar (100) Lists the measure names.   • Hospital 30-Day Death (Mortality) Rates for Heart Attack   • Hospital 30-Day Death (Mortality) Rates for Heart Failure   • Hospital 30-Day Death (Mortality) Rates for Pneumonia   • Hospital 30-Day Readmission Rates for Heart Attack   • Hospital 30-Day Readmission Rates for Heart Failure   • Hospital 30-Day Readmission Rates for Pneumonia   3. National Mortality/Readmission Rate: integer (2) The national risk-adjusted 30-Day Death (mortality) rate.    
18. Outcome of Care Measures – State.csv The Outcome of Care Measures – State.csv table contains twenty-five (25) fields. This table provides the total number of Hospitals in each state that are Better, No Different, and Worse than the U.S. National Rate for each measure. Additionally, this table provides the total number of hospitals where “Number of Cases is Too Small” to tell how well the hospital is performing.  1. State: char (2) Lists the alphabetic postal code used to identify each individual state. All fifty (50) states are listed, as well as:   a. DC = Washington, D.C.   b. GU = Guam   c. MP = Northern Mariana Islands   d. PR = Puerto Rico   e. VI = Virgin Islands   2. Number of Hospitals whose 30-day Death (Mortality) Rates from Heart Attack are Better 
Page Last Updated: July 19, 2012 
than U.S. National Rate: integer Lists the number of hospitals for each measure/category combination.   3. Number of Hospitals whose 30-Day Death (Mortality) Rates from Heart Attack are No different than U.S. National Rate: integer Lists the number of hospitals for each measure/category combination.   4. Number of Hospitals whose 30-Day Death (Mortality) Rates from Heart Attack are Worse than U.S. National Rate: integer Lists the number of hospitals for each measure/category combination.   5. Number of Hospitals whose 30-Day Death (Mortality) Rates from Heart Attack are Number of Cases Too Small: integer Lists the number of hospitals for each measure/category combination.   6. Number of Hospitals whose 30-Day Death (Mortality) Rates from Heart Failure are Better than U.S. National Rate: integer Lists the number of hospitals for each measure/category combination.   7. Number of Hospitals whose 30-Day Death (Mortality) Rates from Heart Failure are No different than U.S. National Rate: integer Lists the number of hospitals for each measure/category combination.   8. Number of Hospitals whose 30-Day Death (Mortality) Rates from Heart Failure are Worse than U.S. National Rate: integer Lists the number of hospitals for each measure/category combination.   9. Number of Hospitals whose 30-Day Death (Mortality) Rates from Heart Failure are Number of Cases Too Small: integer Lists the number of hospitals for each measure/category combination.   10. Number of Hospitals whose 30-Day Death (Mortality) Rates from Pneumonia are Better than U.S. National Rate: integer Lists the number of hospitals for each measure/category combination.   11. Number of Hospitals whose 30-Day Death (Mortality) Rates from Pneumonia are No different than U.S. National Rate: integer Lists the number of hospitals for each measure/category combination.   12. Number of Hospitals whose 30-Day Death (Mortality) Rates from Pneumonia are Worse than U.S. National Rate: integer Lists the number of hospitals for each measure/category combination.   13. Number of Hospitals whose 30-Day Death (Mortality) Rates from Pneumonia are Number of Cases Too Small: integer Lists the number of hospitals for each measure/category combination.   14. Number of Hospitals whose 30-Day Readmission Rates from Heart Attack are Better than U.S. National Rate: integer Lists the number of hospitals for each measure/category combination.   15. Number of Hospitals whose 30-Day Readmission Rates from Heart Attack are No different than U.S. National Rate: integer Lists the number of hospitals for each measure/category combination.   16. Number of Hospitals whose 30-Day Readmission Rates from Heart Attack are Worse than U.S. National Rate: integer Lists the number of hospitals for each measure/category combination.   
Page Last Updated: July 19, 2012 
17. Number of Hospitals whose 30-Day Readmission Rates from Heart Attack are Number of Cases Too Small: integer Lists the number of hospitals for each measure/category combination.   18. Number of Hospitals whose 30-Day Readmission Rates from Heart Failure are Better than U.S. National Rate: integer Lists the number of hospitals for each measure/category combination.   19. Number of Hospitals whose 30-Day Readmission Rates from Heart Failure are No different than U.S.: National Rate: integer Lists the number of hospitals for each measure/category combination.  20. Number of Hospitals whose 30-Day Readmission Rates from Heart Failure are Worse than U.S. National Rate: integer Lists the number of hospitals for each measure/category combination.   21. Number of Hospitals whose 30-Day Readmission Rates from Heart Failure are Number of Cases Too Small: integer Lists the number of hospitals for each measure/category combination.   22. Number of Hospitals whose 30-Day Readmission Rates from Pneumonia are Better than U.S. National Rate: integer Lists the number of hospitals for each measure/category combination.   23. Number of Hospitals whose 30-Day Readmission Rates from Pneumonia are No different than U.S. National Rate: integer Lists the number of hospitals for each measure/category combination.   24. Number of Hospitals whose 30-Day Readmission Rates from Pneumonia are Worse than U.S. National Rate: integer Lists the number of hospitals for each measure/category combination.   25. Number of Hospitals whose 30-Day Readmission Rates from Pneumonia are Number of Cases Too Small: integer Lists the number of hospitals for each measure/category combination.    
19. Outcome of Care Measures.csv The Outcome of Care Measures.csv table contains forty seven (47) fields. This table provides each hospital’s risk-adjusted 30-Day Death (mortality) and 30-Day Readmission category and rate.  1. Provider Number: varchar (6) Lists the hospitals by their provider identification number.   2. Hospital Name: varchar (50) Lists the name of the hospital.   3. Address 1: varchar (50) Lists the first line of the street address of the hospital.   4. Address 2: varchar (50) Lists the second line of the street address of the hospital.   5. Address 3: varchar (50) Lists the third line of the street address of the hospital.   6. City: varchar (28) Lists the city in which the hospital is located.   7. State: varchar (2) Lists the 2 letter State code in which the hospital is located.   8. ZIP Code: char (5) Lists the 5 digit numeric ZIP for the hospital.   9. County Name: char (15) Lists the county in which the hospital is located.   10. Phone Number: char (10) Lists the 10-digit numeric telephone number, including area code, for the Hospital.   11. Hospital 30-Day Death (Mortality) Rates from Heart Attack: Lists the risk adjusted rate (percentage) for each hospital.   12. Comparison to U.S. Rate - Hospital 30-Day Death (Mortality) Rates from Heart 
Page Last Updated: July 19, 2012 
Attack: varchar (50) Lists the mortality and readmission category in which the hospital falls. The values are:   • Better than U.S. National Average   • No Different than U.S. National Average   • Worse than U.S. National Average   • Number of Cases too Small*  13. Lower Mortality Estimate - Hospital 30-Day Death (Mortality) Rates from Heart Attack: Lists the lower bound (Interval Estimate) for each hospital’s risk-adjusted rate.   14. Upper Mortality Estimate - Hospital 30-Day Death (Mortality) Rates from Heart Attack: Lists the upper bound (Interval Estimate) for each hospital’s risk-adjusted rate.   15. Number of Patients - Hospital 30-Day Death (Mortality) Rates from Heart Attack: varchar (5) Lists the number of Medicare patients treated for Heart Attack by the Hospital.   16. Footnote - Hospital 30-Day Death (Mortality) Rates from Heart Attack: Lists the footnote value when appropriate, as related to the Heart Attack Outcome of Care at the hospital.   17. Hospital 30-Day Death (Mortality) Rates from Heart Failure: Lists the risk adjusted rate (percentage) for each hospital.   18. Comparison to U.S. Rate - Hospital 30-Day Death (Mortality) Rates from Heart Failure: varchar (50) Lists the mortality and readmission category in which the hospital falls. The values are:   a. Better than U.S. National Average   b. No Different than U.S. National Average   c.    Worse than U.S. National Average  d.   Number of Cases too Small*   19. Lower Mortality Estimate - Hospital 30-Day Death (Mortality) Rates from Heart Failure: Lists the lower bound (Interval Estimate) for each hospital’s risk-adjusted rate.   20. Upper Mortality Estimate - Hospital 30-Day Death (Mortality) Rates from Heart Failure: Lists the upper bound (Interval Estimate) for each hospital’s risk-adjusted rate.   21. Number of Patients - Hospital 30-Day Death (Mortality) Rates from Heart Failure: varchar (5) Lists the number of Medicare patients treated for Heart Failure by the Hospital.   22. Footnote - Hospital 30-Day Death (Mortality) Rates from Heart Failure: Lists the footnote value when appropriate, as related to the Heart Failure Outcome of Care at the hospital.   23. Hospital 30-Day Death (Mortality) Rates from Pneumonia: Lists the risk adjusted rate (percentage) for each hospital.   24. Comparison to U.S. Rate - Hospital 30-Day Death (Mortality) Rates from Pneumonia: varchar (50) Lists the mortality and readmission category in which the hospital falls. The values are:   •     Better than U.S. National Average   •     No Different than U.S. National Average   •     Worse than U.S. National Average   •     Number of Cases too Small*   25. Lower Mortality Estimate - Hospital 30-Day Death (Mortality) Rates from Pneumonia: Lists the lower bound (Interval Estimate) for each hospital’s risk-adjusted rate.   
Page Last Updated: July 19, 2012 
26. Upper Mortality Estimate - Hospital 30-Day Death (Mortality) Rates from Pneumonia: Lists the upper bound (Interval Estimate) for each hospital’s risk-adjusted rate.   27. Number of Patients - Hospital 30-Day Death (Mortality) Rates from Pneumonia: varchar (5) Lists the number of Medicare patients treated for Pneumonia by the Hospital.   28. Footnote - Hospital 30-Day Death (Mortality) Rates from Pneumonia: Lists the footnote value when appropriate, as related to the Pneumonia Outcome of Care at the hospital.   29. Hospital 30-Day Readmission Rates from Heart Attack: Lists the risk adjusted rate (percentage) for each hospital.   30. Comparison to U.S. Rate - Hospital 30-Day Readmission Rates from Heart Attack: varchar (50) Lists the mortality and readmission category in which the hospital falls. The values are:  •     Better than U.S. National Average   • No Different than U.S. National Average   • Worse than U.S. National Average   • Number of Cases too Small*   32. Lower Readmission Estimate - Hospital 30-Day Readmission Rates from Heart Attack: Lists the lower bound (Interval Estimate) for each hospital’s risk-adjusted rate.   33. Upper Readmission Estimate - Hospital 30-Day Readmission Rates from Heart Attack: Lists the upper bound (Interval Estimate) for each hospital’s risk-adjusted rate.   34. Number of Patients - Hospital 30-Day Readmission Rates from Heart Attack: varchar   (5)  Lists the number of Medicare patients treated for Heart Attack.   35. Footnote - Hospital 30-Day Readmission Rates from Heart Attack: Lists the footnote value when appropriate, as related to the Heart Attack Outcome of Care at the hospital.   36. Hospital 30-Day Readmission Rates from Heart Failure: Lists the risk adjusted rate (percentage) for each hospital.   37. Comparison to U.S. Rate - Hospital 30-Day Readmission Rates from Heart Failure: varchar (50) Lists the mortality and readmission category in which the hospital falls. The values are:   • Better than U.S. National Average   • No Different than U.S. National Average   • Worse than U.S. National Average   • Number of Cases too Small*   38. Lower Readmission Estimate - Hospital 30-Day Readmission Rates from Heart Failure: Lists the lower bound (Interval Estimate) for each hospital’s risk-adjusted rate.   39. Upper Readmission Estimate - Hospital 30-Day Readmission Rates from Heart Failure: Lists the upper bound (Interval Estimate) for each hospital’s risk-adjusted rate.   40. Number of Patients - Hospital 30-Day Readmission Rates from Heart Failure: varchar   (5)  Lists the number of Medicare patients treated for Heart Failure.   41. Footnote - Hospital 30-Day Readmission Rates from Heart Failure: Lists the footnote value when appropriate, as related to the Heart Failure Outcome of Care at the hospital.   42. Hospital 30-Day Readmission Rates from Pneumonia: Lists the risk adjusted rate (percentage) for each hospital.   43. Comparison to U.S. Rate - Hospital 30-Day Readmission Rates from Pneumonia: varchar (50) Lists the mortality and readmission category in which the hospital falls. The values are:   
Page Last Updated: July 19, 2012 
• Better than U.S. National Average   • No Different than U.S. National Average   • Worse than U.S. National Average   • Number of Cases too Small*   44. Lower Readmission Estimate - Hospital 30-Day Readmission Rates from Pneumonia: Lists the lower bound (Interval Estimate) for each hospital’s risk-adjusted rate.   45. Upper Readmission Estimate - Hospital 30-Day Readmission Rates from Pneumonia: Lists the upper bound (Interval Estimate) for each hospital’s risk-adjusted rate.   46. Number of Patients - Hospital 30-Day Readmission Rates from Pneumonia: varchar   (5)  Lists the number of Medicare patients treated for Pneumonia.   47. Footnote - Hospital 30-Day Readmission Rates from Pneumonia: Lists the footnote value when appropriate, as related to the Pneumonia Outcome of Care at the hospital.    
20. Outpatient Imaging Efficiency Measures – National.csv  The Outpatient Imaging Efficiency Measures.csv table contains two (2) fields. This table provides the quality measure scores for each hospital that reported information.  1. Measure Name: varchar (100) Lists the measure names   2. Score varchar (4) Lists the score for the measure.    
21. Outpatient Imaging Efficiency Measures – State.csv  The Outpatient Imaging Efficiency Measures.csv table contains seven (7) fields. This table provides the quality measure scores for each state.  1. State: char (2) Lists the alphabetic postal code used to identify each individual state. All fifty (50) states are listed, as well as:   a. DC = Washington, D.C.   b. GU = Guam   c. MP = Northern Mariana Islands   d. PR = Puerto Rico   e. VI = Virgin Islands   2. Outpatients with low back pain who had an MRI without trying recommended treatments first such as physical therapy.: varchar (4) Lists the score for the measure corresponding to each state.   3. Outpatients who had a follow-up mammogram or ultrasound within 45 days after a screening mammogram.: varchar (4) Lists the score for the measure corresponding to each state.   4. Outpatient CT scans of the abdomen that were combination (double) scans.: varchar   (4) Lists the score for the measure corresponding to each state.   5. Outpatient CT scans of the chest that were combination (double) scans..: varchar (4) Lists the score for the measure corresponding to each state. 6. Outpatients who got cardiac imaging stress tests before low-risk outpatient surgery…: varchar (4) Lists the score for the measure corresponding to each state 7.  Outpatients with brain CT scans who got a sinus CT scan at the same time…: varchar  (4) Lists the score for the measure corresponding to each state  22. Outpatient Imaging Efficiency Measures.csv The Outpatient Imaging Efficiency Measures.csv table contains twenty-six (26) fields. This table 
Page Last Updated: July 19, 2012 
provides the quality measure scores for each hospital that reported information.  1. Provider Number: varchar (6) Lists the hospitals by their provider identification number.   2. Hospital Name: varchar (50) Lists the name of the hospital.   3. Address 1: varchar (50) Lists the first line of the street address of the hospital.   4. Address 2: varchar (50) Lists the second line of the street address of the hospital.   5. Address 3: varchar (50) Lists the third line of the street address of the hospital.   6. City: varchar (28) Lists the city in which the hospital is located.   7. State: varchar (2) Lists the 2 letter State code in which the hospital is located.   8. ZIP Code: char (5) Lists the 5 digit numeric ZIP for the hospital.   9. County Name: char (15) Lists the county in which the hospital is located.   10. Phone Number: char (10) Lists the 10-digit numeric telephone number, including area code, for the Hospital.   11. Outpatients with low back pain who had an MRI without trying recommended treatments first such as physical therapy.: varchar (4) Lists the score for the measure corresponding to the hospital selected.   12. Number of Patients: varchar (12) Lists the patient sample size for each measure that the hospital submitted.  13. Footnote: (1) Lists the footnote value when appropriate. See the footnote table for the values.   14. Outpatients who had a follow-up mammogram or ultrasound within 45 days after a screening mammogram.: varchar (4) Lists the score for the measure corresponding to the hospital selected.   15. Number of Patients: varchar (12) Lists the patient sample size for each measure that the hospital submitted.   16. Footnote: (1) Lists the footnote value when appropriate. See the footnote table for the values.   17. Outpatient CT scans of the abdomen that were combination (double) scans.: varchar (4) Lists the score for the measure corresponding to the hospital selected.   18. Number of Patients: varchar (12) Lists the patient sample size for each measure that the hospital submitted.   19. Footnote: (1) Lists the footnote value when appropriate. See the footnote table for the values.   20. Outpatient CT scans of the chest that were combination (double) scans..: varchar (4) Lists the score for the measure corresponding to the hospital selected.   21. Number of Patients: varchar (12) Lists the patient sample size for each measure that the hospital submitted.   22. Footnote: (1) Lists the footnote value when appropriate. See the footnote table for the values.  23. Outpatients who got cardiac imaging stress tests before low-risk outpatient surgery…: varchar (4) Lists the score for the measure corresponding to each state 24. Footnote: (1) Lists the footnote value when appropriate. See the footnote table for the values. 25. Outpatients with brain CT scans who got a sinus CT scan at the same time…: varchar  (4) Lists the score for the measure corresponding to each state 26. Footnote: (1) Lists the footnote value when appropriate. See the footnote table for the values  
Page Last Updated: July 19, 2012 
23. Process of Care Measures – Children.csv The Process of Care Measures – Children.csv table contains nineteen (19) fields. This table provides the quality measure scores for each hospital that reported information.  1. Provider Number: varchar (6) Lists the hospitals by their provider identification number.   2. Hospital Name: varchar (50) Lists the name of the hospital.   3. Address 1: varchar (50) Lists the first line of the street address of the hospital.   4. Address 2: varchar (50) Lists the second line of the street address of the hospital.   5. Address 3: varchar (50) Lists the third line of the street address of the hospital.   6. City: varchar (28) Lists the city in which the hospital is located.   7. State: varchar (2) Lists the 2 letter State code in which the hospital is located.   8. ZIP Code: char (5) Lists the 5 digit numeric ZIP for the hospital.   9. County Name: char (15) Lists the county in which the hospital is located.   10. Phone Number: char (10) Lists the 10-digit numeric telephone number, including area code, for the Hospital.  11. Percent of Children Who Received Reliever Medication While Hospitalized for Asthma: varchar (4) Lists the score (percentage) for the measure corresponding to the hospital selected.   12. Number of Patients: varchar (12) Lists the patient sample size for each measure that the hospital submitted.   13. Footnote: (1) Lists the footnote value when appropriate. See the footnote table for the values.   14. Percent of Children Who Received Systemic Corticosteroid Medication While Hospitalized for Asthma: varchar (4) Lists the score (percentage) for the measure corresponding to the hospital selected.   15. Number of Patients: varchar (12) Lists the patient sample size for each measure that the hospital submitted.   16. Footnote: (1) Lists the footnote value when appropriate. See the footnote table for the values.   17. Percent of Children and their Caregivers Who Received a Home Management Plan of Care Document While Hospitalized for Asthma: varchar (4) Lists the score (percentage) for the measure corresponding to the hospital selected.   18. Number of Patients: varchar (12) Lists the patient sample size for each measure that the hospital submitted.   19. Footnote: (1) Lists the footnote value when appropriate. See the footnote table for the values.    
24. Process of Care Measures – Heart Attack.csv The Process of Care Measures – Heart Attack.csv table contains forty-nine (49) fields. This table provides the quality measure scores for each hospital that reported information.  1. Provider Number: varchar (6) Lists the hospitals by their provider identification number.   2. Hospital Name: varchar (50) Lists the name of the hospital.   3. Address 1: varchar (50) Lists the first line of the street address of the hospital.   4. Address 2: varchar (50) Lists the second line of the street address of the hospital.   5. Address 3: varchar (50) Lists the third line of the street address of the hospital.   6. City: varchar (28) Lists the city in which the hospital is located.   7. State: varchar (2) Lists the 2 letter State code in which the hospital is located.   
Page Last Updated: July 19, 2012 
8. ZIP Code: char (5) Lists the 5 digit numeric ZIP for the hospital.   9. County Name: char (15) Lists the county in which the hospital is located.   10. Phone Number: char (10) Lists the 10-digit numeric telephone number, including area code, for the Hospital.   11. Percent of Heart Attack Patients Given Aspirin at Arrival: Lists the score (percentage) for the measure corresponding to the hospital selected.   12. Number of Patients: varchar (12) Lists the patient sample size for each measure that the hospital submitted.   13. Footnote: (1) Lists the footnote value when appropriate. See the footnote table for the values.   14. Percent of Heart Attack Patients Given Aspirin at Discharge: Lists the score (percentage) for the measure corresponding to the hospital selected.   15. Number of Patients: varchar (12) Lists the patient sample size for each measure that the hospital submitted.   16. Footnote: (1) Lists the footnote value when appropriate. See the footnote table for the values.   17. Percent of Heart Attack Patients Given ACE Inhibitor or ARB for Left Ventricular Systolic Dysfunction (LVSD): Lists the score (percentage) for the measure corresponding to the hospital selected.   18. Number of Patients: varchar (12) Lists the patient sample size for each measure that the hospital submitted. 19. Footnote: (1) Lists the footnote value when appropriate. See the footnote table for the values.   20. Percent of Heart Attack Patients Given Beta Blocker at Discharge: Lists the score (percentage) for the measure corresponding to the hospital selected.   21. Number of Patients: varchar (12) Lists the patient sample size for each measure that the hospital submitted.   22. Footnote: (1) Lists the footnote value when appropriate. See the footnote table for the values.   23. Percent of Heart Attack Patients Given Smoking Cessation Advice/Counseling: Lists the score (percentage) for the measure corresponding to the hospital selected.   24. Number of Patients: varchar (12) Lists the patient sample size for each measure that the hospital submitted.   25. Footnote: (1) Lists the footnote value when appropriate. See the footnote table for the values.   26. Percent of Heart Attack Patients Given Fibrinolytic Medication Within 30 Minutes Of Arrival: Lists the score (percentage) for the measure corresponding to the hospital selected.   27. Number of Patients: varchar (12) Lists the patient sample size for each measure that the hospital submitted.   28. Footnote: (1) Lists the footnote value when appropriate. See the footnote table for the values.   29. Percent of Heart Attack Patients Given PCI Within 90 Minutes Of Arrival: Lists the score (percentage) for the measure corresponding to the hospital selected.   30. Number of Patients: varchar (12) Lists the patient sample size for each measure that the hospital submitted.   31. Footnote: (1) Lists the footnote value when appropriate. See the footnote table for the 
Page Last Updated: July 19, 2012 
values.   32. Average number of minutes before outpatients with chest pain or possible heart attack got an ECG: Lists the score (minutes) for the measure corresponding to the hospital selected.   33. Number of Patients: varchar (12) Lists the patient sample size for each measure that the hospital submitted.   34. Footnote: (1) Lists the footnote value when appropriate. See the footnote table for the values.   35. Average number of minutes before outpatients with chest pain or possible heart attack were transferred to another hospital: Lists the score (minutes) for the measure corresponding to the hospital selected.   36. Number of Patients: varchar (12) Lists the patient sample size for each measure that the hospital submitted.   37. Footnote: (1) Lists the footnote value when appropriate. See the footnote table for the values.   38. Median Time to Fibrinolysis: Lists the score (minutes) for the measure corresponding to the hospital selected.   39. Number of Patients: varchar (12) Lists the patient sample size for each measure that the hospital submitted.   40. Footnote: (1) Lists the footnote value when appropriate. See the footnote table for the values.   41. Outpatients with chest pain or possible heart attack who got aspirin within 24 hours of arrival: Lists the score for the measure corresponding to the hospital selected.   42. Number of Patients: varchar (12) Lists the patient sample size for each measure that the hospital submitted.   43. Footnote: (1) Lists the footnote value when appropriate. See the footnote table for the values.   44. Outpatients with chest pain or possible heart attack who got drugs to break up blood clots within 30 minutes of arrival: Lists the score for the measure corresponding to the hospital selected.   45. Number of Patients: varchar (12) Lists the patient sample size for each measure that the hospital submitted.  46. Footnote: (1) Lists the footnote value when appropriate. See the footnote table for the values. 47. Heart Attack Patients Given a Prescription for a Statin at Discharge: Lists the number (percent) of patients that received a Statin upon discharge from the hospital. 48. Number of Patients: varchar (12) Lists the patient sample size for each measure that the hospital submitted.  49. Footnote: (1) Lists the footnote value when appropriate. See the footnote table for the values.   
25. Process of Care Measures – Heart Failure.csv  The Process of Care Measures – Heart Failure.csv table contains twenty-two (22) fields. This table provides the quality measure scores for each hospital that reported information.  1. Provider Number: varchar (6) Lists the hospitals by their provider identification number.   2. Hospital Name: varchar (50) Lists the name of the hospital.   3. Address 1: varchar (50) Lists the first line of the street address of the hospital.   
Page Last Updated: July 19, 2012 
4. Address 2: varchar (50) Lists the second line of the street address of the hospital.   5. Address 3: varchar (50) Lists the third line of the street address of the hospital.   6. City: varchar (28) Lists the city in which the hospital is located.   7. State: varchar (2) Lists the 2 letter State code in which the hospital is located.   8. ZIP Code: char (5) Lists the 5 digit numeric ZIP for the hospital.   9. County Name: char (15) Lists the county in which the hospital is located.   10. Phone Number: char (10) Lists the 10-digit numeric telephone number, including area code, for the Hospital.   11. Percent of Heart Failure Patients Given an Evaluation of Left Ventricular Systolic (LVS) Function: Lists the score (percentage) for the measure corresponding to the hospital selected.   12. Number of Patients: varchar (12) Lists the patient sample size for each measure that the hospital submitted.   13. Footnote: (1) Lists the footnote value when appropriate. See the footnote table for the values.   14. Percent of Heart Failure Patients Given ACE Inhibitor or ARB for Left Ventricular Systolic Dysfunction (LVSD): Lists the score (percentage) for the measure corresponding to the hospital selected.   15. Number of Patients: varchar (12) Lists the patient sample size for each measure that the hospital submitted.   16. Footnote: (1) Lists the footnote value when appropriate. See the footnote table for the values.   17. Percent of Heart Failure Patients Given Discharge Instructions: Lists the score (percentage) for the measure corresponding to the hospital selected.   18. Number of Patients: varchar (12) Lists the patient sample size for each measure that the hospital submitted.   19. Footnote: (1) Lists the footnote value when appropriate. See the footnote table for the values.   20. Percent of Heart Failure Patients Given Smoking Cessation Advice/Counseling: Lists the score (percentage) for the measure corresponding to the hospital selected.   21. Number of Patients: varchar (12) Lists the patient sample size for each measure that the hospital submitted.   22. Footnote: (1) Lists the footnote value when appropriate. See the footnote table for the values.    
26. Process of Care Measures – National.csv  1. Condition: (29) Lists the clinical condition. The values are:   • Heart Attack   • Heart Failure   • Pneumonia   • Surgical Care Improvement   • Children’s Asthma Care   2. Category   • Children’s Asthma Care • Heart Attack   • Heart Failure   
Page Last Updated: July 19, 2012 
• Pneumonia   • Surgical Infection Prevention   4. Measure Name:   • Top 10% of Hospitals submitting data scored equal to or higher than:   • National Average of Hospitals submitting data:   5. National Mortality/Readmission Rate: (4) Lists the top 10% and national score for each measure.    
27. Process of Care Measures – Pneumonia.csv The Process of Care Measures – Pneumonia.csv table contains twenty-eight (28) fields. This table provides the quality measure scores for each hospital that reported information.  1. Provider Number: varchar (6) Lists the hospitals by their provider identification number.   2. Hospital Name: varchar (50) Lists the name of the hospital.   3. Address 1: varchar (50) Lists the first line of the street address of the hospital.   4. Address 2: varchar (50) Lists the second line of the street address of the hospital.  5. Address 3: varchar (50) Lists the third line of the street address of the hospital.   6. City: varchar (28) Lists the city in which the hospital is located.   7. State: varchar (2) Lists the 2 letter State code in which the hospital is located.   8. ZIP Code: char (5) Lists the 5 digit numeric ZIP for the hospital.   9. County Name: char (15) Lists the county in which the hospital is located.   10. Phone Number: char (10) Lists the 10-digit numeric telephone number, including area code, for the Hospital.   11. Percent of Pneumonia Patients Assessed and Given Pneumococcal Vaccination: Lists the score (percentage) for the measure corresponding to the hospital selected.   12. Number of Patients: varchar (12) Lists the patient sample size for each measure that the hospital submitted.   13. Footnote: (1) Lists the footnote value when appropriate. See the footnote table for the values.   14. Percent of Pneumonia Patients Given Initial Antibiotic(s) within 6 Hours After Arrival: Lists the score (percentage) for the measure corresponding to the hospital selected.   15. Number of Patients: varchar (12) Lists the patient sample size for each measure that the hospital submitted.   16. Footnote: (1) Lists the footnote value when appropriate. See the footnote table for the values.   17. Percent of Pneumonia Patients Whose Initial ER Blood Culture Was Performed Prior To Administration Of First Dose Of Antibiotics: Lists the score (percentage) for the measure corresponding to the hospital selected.   18. Number of Patients: varchar (12) Lists the patient sample size for each measure that the hospital submitted.   19. Footnote: (1) Lists the footnote value when appropriate. See the footnote table for the values.   20. Percent of Pneumonia Patients Given Smoking Cessation Advice/Counseling: Lists the score (percentage) for the measure corresponding to the hospital selected.   21. Number of Patients: varchar (12) Lists the patient sample size for each measure that the hospital submitted.   22. Footnote: (1) Lists the footnote value when appropriate. See the footnote table for the 
Page Last Updated: July 19, 2012 
values.   23. Percent of Pneumonia Patients Given the Most Appropriate Initial Antibiotic(s): Lists the score (percentage) for the measure corresponding to the hospital selected.   24. Number of Patients: varchar (12) Lists the patient sample size for each measure that the hospital submitted.   25. Footnote: (1) Lists the footnote value when appropriate. See the footnote table for the values.   26. Percent of Pneumonia Patients Assessed and Given Influenza Vaccination: Lists the score (percentage) for the measure corresponding to the hospital selected.   27. Number of Patients: varchar (12) Lists the patient sample size for each measure that the hospital submitted.   28. Footnote: (1) Lists the footnote value when appropriate. See the footnote table for the values.    
28. Process of Care Measures – SCIP.csv  The Process of Care Measures – Surgery.csv table contains thirty-seven (37) fields. This table provides the quality measure scores for each hospital that reported information.  1. Provider Number: varchar (6) Lists the hospitals by their provider identification number.   2. Hospital Name: varchar (50) Lists the name of the hospital.   3. Address 1: varchar (50) Lists the first line of the street address of the hospital.   4. Address 2: varchar (50) Lists the second line of the street address of the hospital. 5. Address 3: varchar (50) Lists the third line of the street address of the hospital.   6. City: varchar (28) Lists the city in which the hospital is located.   7. State: varchar (2) Lists the 2 letter State code in which the hospital is located.   8. ZIP Code: char (5) Lists the 5 digit numeric ZIP for the hospital.   9. County Name: char (15) Lists the county in which the hospital is located.   10. Phone Number: char (10) Lists the 10-digit numeric telephone number, including area code, for the Hospital.   11. Percent of Surgery Patients given an antibiotic at the right time (within one hour before surgery) to help prevent infection: Lists the score (percentage) for the measure corresponding to the hospital selected.   12. Number of Patients: varchar (12) Lists the patient sample size for each measure that the hospital submitted.   13. Footnote: (1) Lists the footnote value when appropriate. See the footnote table for the values.   14. Percent of Surgery Patients whose preventive antibiotics were stopped at the right time (within 24 hours after surgery): Lists the score (percentage) for the measure corresponding to the hospital selected.   15. Number of Patients: varchar (12) Lists the patient sample size for each measure that the hospital submitted.   16. Footnote: (1) Lists the footnote value when appropriate. See the footnote table for the values.   17. Percent of Surgery Patients who were given the right kind of antibiotic to help prevent infection: Lists the score (percentage) for the measure corresponding to the hospital selected.   18. Number of Patients: varchar (12) Lists the patient sample size for each measure that the 
Page Last Updated: July 19, 2012 
hospital submitted.   19. Footnote: (1) Lists the footnote value when appropriate. See the footnote table for the values.   20. Percent of Surgery Patients who got treatment at right time (within 24 hours before or after surgery) to help prevent blood clot: Lists the score (percentage) for the measure corresponding to the hospital selected.   21. Number of Patients: varchar (12) Lists the patient sample size for each measure that the hospital submitted.   22. Footnote: (1) Lists the footnote value when appropriate. See the footnote table for the values.   23. Percent of Surgery Patients whose doctors ordered treatments to prevent blood clots after certain types of surgeries: Lists the score (percentage) for the measure corresponding to the hospital selected.   24. Number of Patients: varchar (12) Lists the patient sample size for each measure that the hospital submitted.  25. Footnote: (1) Lists the footnote value when appropriate. See the footnote table for the values.   26. Percent of all Heart Surgery Patients whose blood sugar is kept under good control in the days right after surgery: Lists the score (percentage) for the measure corresponding to the hospital selected.   27. Number of Patients: varchar (12) Lists the patient sample size for each measure that the hospital submitted.   28. Footnote: (1) Lists the footnote value when appropriate. See the footnote table for the values.   29. Percent of Surgery Patients needing hair removed from the surgical area before surgery who had hair removed using a safer method: Lists the score (percentage) for the measure corresponding to the hospital selected.   30. Number of Patients: varchar (12) Lists the patient sample size for each measure that the hospital submitted.   31. Footnote: (1) Lists the footnote value when appropriate. See the footnote table for the values.  32. Percent of Surgery Patients who were taking beta blockers before coming to the hospital, who were kept on the beta blockers: Lists the score (percentage) for the measure corresponding to the hospital selected.   33. Number of Patients: varchar (12) Lists the patient sample size for each measure that the hospital submitted.   34. Footnote: (1) Lists the footnote value when appropriate. See the footnote table for the values.  35. Patients having surgery who were actively warmed in the operating room or whose body temperature was near normal by the end of surgery: Lists the score (percentage) for the measure corresponding to the hospital selected. 36. Number of Patients: varchar (12) Lists the patient sample size for each measure that the hospital submitted.   37. Footnote: (1) Lists the footnote value when appropriate. See the footnote table for the values.   29. Process of Care Measures – State.csv The Process of Care Measures – State.csv table contains thirty-six (36) fields. This table provides the State average for each hospital process of care quality measure. 
Page Last Updated: July 19, 2012  
1. State: char (2) Lists the alphabetic postal code used to identify each individual state. All fifty (50) states are listed, as well as:   • DC = Washington, D.C.   • GU = Guam   • MP = Northern Mariana Islands   • PR = Puerto Rico   • VI = Virgin Islands   2. Percent of Heart Attack Patients Given Aspirin at Arrival: char (3) Lists the measure average for each State.   3. Percent of Heart Attack Patients Given Aspirin at Discharge: char (3) Lists the measure average for each State.   4. Percent of Heart Attack Patients Given ACE Inhibitor or ARB for Left Ventricular Systolic Dysfunction (LVSD) : char (3) Lists the measure average for each State.   5. Percent of Heart Attack Patients Given Beta Blocker at Discharge: char (3) Lists the measure average for each State.   6. Percent of Heart Attack Patients Given Smoking Cessation Advice/Counseling: char   (3) Lists the measure average for each State.   7. Percent of Heart Attack Patients Given Fibrinolytic Medication Within 30 Minutes Of Arrival: char (3) Lists the measure average for each State.   8. Percent of Heart Attack Patients Given PCI Within 90 Minutes Of Arrival: char (3) Lists the measure average for each State.   9. Percent of Heart Failure Patients Given an Evaluation of Left Ventricular Systolic (LVS) Function: char (3) Lists the measure average for each State.   10. Percent of Heart Failure Patients Given ACE Inhibitor or ARB for Left Ventricular Systolic Dysfunction (LVSD): char (3) Lists the measure average for each State.   11. Percent of Heart Failure Patients Given Discharge Instructions: char (3) Lists the measure average for each State.   12. Percent of Heart Failure Patients Given Smoking Cessation Advice/Counseling: char (3) Lists the measure average for each State.   13. Percent of Pneumonia Patients Assessed and Given Pneumococcal Vaccination: char (3) Lists the measure average for each State.   14. Percent of Pneumonia Patients Given Initial Antibiotic(s) within 6 Hours After Arrival: char (3) Lists the measure average for each State.   15. Percent of Pneumonia Patients Whose Initial ER Blood Culture Was Performed Prior To Administration Of First Dose Of Antibiotics: char (3) Lists the measure average for each State.   16. Percent of Pneumonia Patients Given Smoking Cessation Advice/Counseling: char (3) Lists the measure average for each State.   17. Percent of Pneumonia Patients Given the Most Appropriate Initial Antibiotic(s) : char (3) Lists the measure average for each State.   18. Percent of Pneumonia Patients Assessed and Given Influenza Vaccination: char (3) Lists the measure average for each State.   19. Percent of Surgery Patients given an antibiotic at the right time (within one hour before surgery) to help prevent infection: char (3) Lists the measure average for each State.   20. Percent of Surgery Patients whose preventive antibiotics were stopped at the right time 
Page Last Updated: July 19, 2012 
(within  24 hours after surgery) : char (3) Lists the measure average for each State.   21. Percent of Surgery Patients who were given the right kind of antibiotic to help prevent infection: char (3) Lists the measure average for each State.   22. Percent of Surgery Patients who got treatment at right time (within 24 hours before or after surgery) to help prevent blood clot: char (3) Lists the measure average for each State.   23. Percent of Surgery Patients whose doctors ordered treatments to prevent blood clots after certain types of surgeries: char (3) Lists the measure average for each State.   24. Percent of all Heart Surgery Patients whose blood sugar is kept under good control in the days right after surgery: char (3) Lists the measure average for each State.   25. Percent of Surgery Patients needing hair removed from the surgical area before surgery who had hair removed using a safer method: char (3) Lists the measure average for each State.   26. Percent of Surgery Patients who were taking beta blockers before coming to the hospital, who were kept on the beta blockers: char (3) Lists the measure average for each State.   27. Percent of Children Who Received Reliever Medication While Hospitalized for Asthma: char (3) Lists the measure average for each State.   28. Percent of Children Who Received Systemic Corticosteroid Medication While Hospitalized for Asthma: char (3) Lists the measure average for each State.   29. Percent of Children and their Caregivers Who Received a Home Management Plan of Care Document While Hospitalized for Asthma: char (3) Lists the measure average for each State.   30. Average number of minutes before outpatients with chest pain or possible heart attack got an ECG: char (3) Lists the measure average for each State.   31. Average number of minutes before outpatients with chest pain or possible heart attack were transferred to another hospital: char (3) Lists the measure average for each State.   32. Median Time to Fibrinolysis: char (3) Lists the measure average for each State.   33. Median Outpatients with chest pain or possible heart attack who got aspirin within 24 hours of arrival: char (3) Lists the measure average for each State.   34. Outpatients with chest pain or possible heart attack who got drugs to break up blood clots within 30 minutes of arrival: char (3) Lists the measure average for each State. 35. Heart Attack Patients Given a Prescription for a Statin at Discharge: char (3) Lists the measure average for each state. 36. Patients having surgery who were actively warmed in the operating room or whose body temperature was near normal: char (3) Lists the measure average for each state.   
29. Structural Measures.csv The Structural Measures.csv table contains twelve (12) fields. 1. Provider Number: varchar (6) Lists the hospitals by their provider identification number.   2. Hospital Name: varchar (50) Lists the name of the hospital.   3. Address 1: varchar (50) Lists the first line of the street address of the hospital.   4. Address 2: varchar (50) Lists the second line of the street address of the hospital.   
Page Last Updated: July 19, 2012 
5. Address 3: varchar (50) Lists the third line of the street address of the hospital.   6. City: varchar (28) Lists the city in which the hospital is located.   7. State: varchar (2) Lists the 2 letter State code in which the hospital is located.   8. ZIP Code: char (5) Lists the 5 digit numeric ZIP for the hospital.   9. County Name: char (15) Lists the county in which the hospital is located.   10. Phone Number: char (10) Lists the 10-digit numeric telephone number, including area code, for the Hospital.   11. Measure Name: varchar (255) Lists the measure names, see chart at the end of this document.   12. Measure Response: varchar (50) Lists the cardiac surgery registry participation reponses. The values are:   • Yes   • No   • Does not have a Cardiac Surgery Program   • Not Available    
  Process of Care Quality Measures Chart Total Measures = 37  INTRODUCTION 
If you want to be proficient in the writing of code in the C programming language, you must have a thorough working knowledge of how to use pointers. Unfortunately, C pointers appear to represent a stumbling block to newcomers, particularly those coming from other computer languages such as Fortran, Pascal or Basic.  
To aid those newcomers in the understanding of pointers I have written the following material. To get the maximum benefit from this material, I feel it is important that the user be able to run the code in the various listings contained in the article. I have attempted, therefore, to keep all code ANSI compliant so that it will work with any ANSI compliant compiler. I have also tried to carefully block the code within the text. That way, with the help of an ASCII text editor, you can copy a given block of code to a new file and compile it on your system. I recommend that readers do this as it will help in understanding the material.  
 
5 
CHAPTER 1: What is a pointer?  
One of those things beginners in C find difficult is the concept of pointers. The purpose of this tutorial is to provide an introduction to pointers and their use to these beginners.  
I have found that often the main reason beginners have a problem with pointers is that they have a weak or minimal feeling for variables, (as they are used in C). Thus we start with a discussion of C variables in general.  
A variable in a program is something with a name, the value of which can vary. The way the compiler and linker handles this is that it assigns a specific block of memory within the computer to hold the value of that variable. The size of that block depends on the range over which the variable is allowed to vary. For example, on PC's the size of an integer variable is 2 bytes, and that of a long integer is 4 bytes. In C the size of a variable type such as an integer need not be the same on all types of machines.  
When we declare a variable we inform the compiler of two things, the name of the variable and the type of the variable. For example, we declare a variable of type integer with the name k by writing:  
    int k;  
On seeing the "int" part of this statement the compiler sets aside 2 bytes of memory (on a PC) to hold the value of the integer. It also sets up a symbol table. In that table it adds the symbol k and the relative address in memory where those 2 bytes were set aside.  
Thus, later if we write:  
    k = 2;  
we expect that, at run time when this statement is executed, the value 2 will be placed in that memory location reserved for the storage of the value of k. In C we refer to a variable such as the integer k as an "object".  
In a sense there are two "values" associated with the object k. One is the value of the integer stored there (2 in the above example) and the other the "value" of the memory location, i.e., the address of k. Some texts refer to these two values with the nomenclature rvalue (right value, pronounced "are value") and lvalue (left value, pronounced "el value") respectively.  
In some languages, the lvalue is the value permitted on the left side of the assignment operator '=' (i.e. the address where the result of evaluation of the right side ends up). The rvalue is that which is on the right side of the assignment statement, the 2 above. Rvalues cannot be used on the left side of the assignment statement. Thus: 2 = k; is illegal.  
 
6 
Actually, the above definition of "lvalue" is somewhat modified for C. According to K&R II (page 197): [1]  
"An object is a named region of storage; an lvalue is an expression referring to an object."  
However, at this point, the definition originally cited above is sufficient. As we become more familiar with pointers we will go into more detail on this.  
Okay, now consider:  
   int j, k;   
    k = 2;      j = 7;    <-- line 1      k = j;    <-- line 2  
In the above, the compiler interprets the j in line 1 as the address of the variable j (its lvalue) and creates code to copy the value 7 to that address. In line 2, however, the j is interpreted as its rvalue (since it is on the right hand side of the assignment operator '='). That is, here the j refers to the value stored at the memory location set aside for j, in this case 7. So, the 7 is copied to the address designated by the lvalue of k.  
In all of these examples, we are using 2 byte integers so all copying of rvalues from one storage location to the other is done by copying 2 bytes. Had we been using long integers, we would be copying 4 bytes.  
Now, let's say that we have a reason for wanting a variable designed to hold an lvalue (an address). The size required to hold such a value depends on the system. On older desk top computers with 64K of memory total, the address of any point in memory can be contained in 2 bytes. Computers with more memory would require more bytes to hold an address. Some computers, such as the IBM PC might require special handling to hold a segment and offset under certain circumstances. The actual size required is not too important so long as we have a way of informing the compiler that what we want to store is an address.  
Such a variable is called a pointer variable (for reasons which hopefully will become clearer a little later). In C when we define a pointer variable we do so by preceding its name with an asterisk. In C we also give our pointer a type which, in this case, refers to the type of data stored at the address we will be storing in our pointer. For example, consider the variable declaration:  
   int *ptr; 
ptr is the name of our variable (just as k was the name of our integer variable). The '*' informs the compiler that we want a pointer variable, i.e. to set aside however many bytes is required to store an address in memory. The int says that we intend to use our pointer 
 
7 
variable to store the address of an integer. Such a pointer is said to "point to" an integer. However, note that when we wrote int k; we did not give k a value. If this definition is made outside of any function ANSI compliant compilers will initialize it to zero. Similarly, ptr has no value, that is we haven't stored an address in it in the above declaration. In this case, again if the declaration is outside of any function, it is initialized to a value guaranteed in such a way that it is guaranteed to not point to any C object or function. A pointer initialized in this manner is called a "null" pointer.  
The actual bit pattern used for a null pointer may or may not evaluate to zero since it depends on the specific system on which the code is developed. To make the source code compatible between various compilers on various systems, a macro is used to represent a null pointer. That macro goes under the name NULL. Thus, setting the value of a pointer using the NULL macro, as with an assignment statement such as ptr = NULL, guarantees that the pointer has become a null pointer. Similarly, just as one can test for an integer value of zero, as in if(k == 0), we can test for a null pointer using if (ptr == NULL).  
But, back to using our new variable ptr. Suppose now that we want to store in ptr the address of our integer variable k. To do this we use the unary & operator and write: 
    ptr = &k;  
What the & operator does is retrieve the lvalue (address) of k, even though k is on the right hand side of the assignment operator '=', and copies that to the contents of our pointer ptr. Now, ptr is said to "point to" k. Bear with us now, there is only one more operator we need to discuss.  
The "dereferencing operator" is the asterisk and it is used as follows:  
    *ptr = 7;  
will copy 7 to the address pointed to by ptr. Thus if ptr "points to" (contains the address of) k, the above statement will set the value of k to 7. That is, when we use the '*' this way we are referring to the value of that which ptr is pointing to, not the value of the pointer itself.  
Similarly, we could write:  
 printf("%d\n",*ptr);  
to print to the screen the integer value stored at the address pointed to by ptr;.  
One way to see how all this stuff fits together would be to run the following program and then review the code and the output carefully.  
------------ Program 1.1 ---------------------------------   
/* Program 1.1 from PTRTUT10.TXT   6/10/97 */  
 
8 
#include <stdio.h>  
int j, k; int *ptr;  
int main(void) {     j = 1;     k = 2;     ptr = &k;     printf("\n");     printf("j has the value %d and is stored at %p\n", j, (void *)&j);     printf("k has the value %d and is stored at %p\n", k, (void *)&k);     printf("ptr has the value %p and is stored at %p\n", ptr, (void *)&ptr);     printf("The value of the integer pointed to by ptr is %d\n", *ptr);  
    return 0; } 
Note: We have yet to discuss those aspects of C which require the use of the (void *) expression used here. For now, include it in your test code. We'll explain the reason behind this expression later.  
To review:  
• A variable is declared by giving it a type and a name (e.g. int k;)  • A pointer variable is declared by giving it a type and a name (e.g. int *ptr) where the asterisk tells the compiler that the variable named ptr is a pointer variable and the type tells the compiler what type the pointer is to point to (integer in this case).  • Once a variable is declared, we can get its address by preceding its name with the unary & operator, as in &k.  • We can "dereference" a pointer, i.e. refer to the value of that which it points to, by using the unary '*' operator as in *ptr.  • An "lvalue" of a variable is the value of its address, i.e. where it is stored in memory. The "rvalue" of a variable is the value stored in that variable (at that address).  
References for Chapter 1:  
1. "The C Programming Language" 2nd Edition B. Kernighan and D. Ritchie  Prentice Hall  ISBN 0-13-110362-8  
 
9 
CHAPTER 2: Pointer types and Arrays  
Okay, let's move on. Let us consider why we need to identify the type of variable that a pointer points to, as in:  
     int *ptr; 
One reason for doing this is so that later, once ptr "points to" something, if we write:  
    *ptr = 2; 
the compiler will know how many bytes to copy into that memory location pointed to by ptr. If ptr was declared as pointing to an integer, 2 bytes would be copied, if a long, 4 bytes would be copied. Similarly for floats and doubles the appropriate number will be copied. But, defining the type that the pointer points to permits a number of other interesting ways a compiler can interpret code. For example, consider a block in memory consisting if ten integers in a row. That is, 20 bytes of memory are set aside to hold 10 integers.  
Now, let's say we point our integer pointer ptr at the first of these integers. Furthermore lets say that integer is located at memory location 100 (decimal). What happens when we write:  
    ptr + 1;  
Because the compiler "knows" this is a pointer (i.e. its value is an address) and that it points to an integer (its current address, 100, is the address of an integer), it adds 2 to ptr instead of 1, so the pointer "points to" the next integer, at memory location 102. Similarly, were the ptr declared as a pointer to a long, it would add 4 to it instead of 1. The same goes for other data types such as floats, doubles, or even user defined data types such as structures. This is obviously not the same kind of "addition" that we normally think of. In C it is referred to as addition using "pointer arithmetic", a term which we will come back to later.  
Similarly, since ++ptr and ptr++ are both equivalent to ptr + 1 (though the point in the program when ptr is incremented may be different), incrementing a pointer using the unary ++ operator, either pre- or post-, increments the address it stores by the amount sizeof(type) where "type" is the type of the object pointed to. (i.e. 2 for an integer, 4 for a long, etc.).  
Since a block of 10 integers located contiguously in memory is, by definition, an array of integers, this brings up an interesting relationship between arrays and pointers. 
 
10 
  
Consider the following:  
    int my_array[] = {1,23,17,4,-5,100};  
Here we have an array containing 6 integers. We refer to each of these integers by means of a subscript to my_array, i.e. using my_array[0] through my_array[5]. But, we could alternatively access them via a pointer as follows:  
    int *ptr;     ptr = &my_array[0];       /* point our pointer at the first                                  integer in our array */  
And then we could print out our array either using the array notation or by dereferencing our pointer. The following code illustrates this:  
-----------  Program 2.1  -----------------------------------  
/* Program 2.1 from PTRTUT10.HTM   6/13/97 */  
#include <stdio.h>  
int my_array[] = {1,23,17,4,-5,100}; int *ptr;  
int main(void) {     int i;     ptr = &my_array[0];     /* point our pointer to the first                                       element of the array */     printf("\n\n");     for (i = 0; i < 6; i++)     {       printf("my_array[%d] = %d   ",i,my_array[i]);   /*<-- A */       printf("ptr + %d = %d\n",i, *(ptr + i));        /*<-- B */     }     return 0; } 
Compile and run the above program and carefully note lines A and B and that the program prints out the same values in either case. Also observe how we dereferenced our pointer in line B, i.e. we first added i to it and then dereferenced the new pointer. Change line B to read:  
    printf("ptr + %d = %d\n",i, *ptr++); 
and run it again... then change it to:  
    printf("ptr + %d = %d\n",i, *(++ptr)); 
 
11 
and try once more. Each time try and predict the outcome and carefully look at the actual outcome.  
In C, the standard states that wherever we might use &var_name[0] we can replace that with var_name, thus in our code where we wrote:  
    ptr = &my_array[0]; 
we can write:  
    ptr = my_array; 
to achieve the same result.  
This leads many texts to state that the name of an array is a pointer. I prefer to mentally think "the name of the array is the address of first element in the array". Many beginners (including myself when I was learning) have a tendency to become confused by thinking of it as a pointer. For example, while we can write  
    ptr = my_array; 
we cannot write  
    my_array = ptr; 
The reason is that while ptr is a variable, my_array is a constant. That is, the location at which the first element of my_array will be stored cannot be changed once my_array[] has been declared.  
Earlier when discussing the term "lvalue" I cited K&R-2 where it stated:  
"An object is a named region of storage; an lvalue is an expression referring to an object".  
This raises an interesting problem. Since my_array is a named region of storage, why is my_array in the above assignment statement not an lvalue? To resolve this problem, some refer to my_array as an "unmodifiable lvalue".  
Modify the example program above by changing  
    ptr = &my_array[0]; 
to  
    ptr = my_array; 
and run it again to verify the results are identical.  
 
12 
Now, let's delve a little further into the difference between the names ptr and my_array as used above. Some writers will refer to an array's name as a constant pointer. What do we mean by that? Well, to understand the term "constant" in this sense, let's go back to our definition of the term "variable". When we declare a variable we set aside a spot in memory to hold the value of the appropriate type. Once that is done the name of the variable can be interpreted in one of two ways. When used on the left side of the assignment operator, the compiler interprets it as the memory location to which to move that value resulting from evaluation of the right side of the assignment operator. But, when used on the right side of the assignment operator, the name of a variable is interpreted to mean the contents stored at that memory address set aside to hold the value of that variable.  
With that in mind, let's now consider the simplest of constants, as in:  
    int i, k;     i = 2; 
Here, while i is a variable and then occupies space in the data portion of memory, 2 is a constant and, as such, instead of setting aside memory in the data segment, it is imbedded directly in the code segment of memory. That is, while writing something like k = i; tells the compiler to create code which at run time will look at memory location &i to determine the value to be moved to k, code created by i = 2; simply puts the 2 in the code and there is no referencing of the data segment. That is, both k and i are objects, but 2 is not an object.  
Similarly, in the above, since my_array is a constant, once the compiler establishes where the array itself is to be stored, it "knows" the address of my_array[0] and on seeing:  
    ptr = my_array; 
it simply uses this address as a constant in the code segment and there is no referencing of the data segment beyond that.  
This might be a good place explain further the use of the (void *) expression used in Program 1.1 of Chapter 1. As we have seen we can have pointers of various types. So far we have discussed pointers to integers and pointers to characters. In coming chapters we will be learning about pointers to structures and even pointer to pointers.  
Also we have learned that on different systems the size of a pointer can vary. As it turns out it is also possible that the size of a pointer can vary depending on the data type of the object to which it points. Thus, as with integers where you can run into trouble attempting to assign a long integer to a variable of type short integer, you can run into trouble attempting to assign the values of pointers of various types to pointer variables of other types.  
 
13 
To minimize this problem, C provides for a pointer of type void. We can declare such a pointer by writing:  
void *vptr; 
A void pointer is sort of a generic pointer. For example, while C will not permit the comparison of a pointer to type integer with a pointer to type character, for example, either of these can be compared to a void pointer. Of course, as with other variables, casts can be used to convert from one type of pointer to another under the proper circumstances. In Program 1.1. of Chapter 1 I cast the pointers to integers into void pointers to make them compatible with the %p conversion specification. In later chapters other casts will be made for reasons defined therein.  
Well, that's a lot of technical stuff to digest and I don't expect a beginner to understand all of it on first reading. With time and experimentation you will want to come back and reread the first 2 chapters. But for now, let's move on to the relationship between pointers, character arrays, and strings.  
 
14 
CHAPTER 3: Pointers and Strings  
The study of strings is useful to further tie in the relationship between pointers and arrays. It also makes it easy to illustrate how some of the standard C string functions can be implemented. Finally it illustrates how and when pointers can and should be passed to functions.  
In C, strings are arrays of characters. This is not necessarily true in other languages. In BASIC, Pascal, Fortran and various other languages, a string has its own data type. But in C it does not. In C a string is an array of characters terminated with a binary zero character (written as '\0'). To start off our discussion we will write some code which, while preferred for illustrative purposes, you would probably never write in an actual program. Consider, for example:  
    char my_string[40];  
    my_string[0] = 'T';     my_string[1] = 'e';     my_string[2] = 'd':     my_string[3] = '\0'; 
While one would never build a string like this, the end result is a string in that it is an array of characters terminated with a nul character. By definition, in C, a string is an array of characters terminated with the nul character. Be aware that "nul" is not the same as "NULL". The nul refers to a zero as defined by the escape sequence '\0'. That is it occupies one byte of memory. NULL, on the other hand, is the name of the macro used to initialize null pointers. NULL is #defined in a header file in your C compiler, nul may not be #defined at all.  
Since writing the above code would be very time consuming, C permits two alternate ways of achieving the same thing. First, one might write:  
    char my_string[40] = {'T', 'e', 'd', '\0',};     
But this also takes more typing than is convenient. So, C permits:  
    char my_string[40] = "Ted"; 
When the double quotes are used, instead of the single quotes as was done in the previous examples, the nul character ( '\0' ) is automatically appended to the end of the string.  
In all of the above cases, the same thing happens. The compiler sets aside an contiguous block of memory 40 bytes long to hold characters and initialized it such that the first 4 characters are Ted\0.  
Now, consider the following program:  
 
15  
------------------program 3.1-------------------------------------  
/* Program 3.1 from PTRTUT10.HTM   6/13/97 */  
#include <stdio.h>  
char strA[80] = "A string to be used for demonstration purposes"; char strB[80];  
int main(void) {  
    char *pA;     /* a pointer to type character */     char *pB;     /* another pointer to type character */     puts(strA);   /* show string A */     pA = strA;    /* point pA at string A */     puts(pA);     /* show what pA is pointing to */     pB = strB;    /* point pB at string B */     putchar('\n');       /* move down one line on the screen */     while(*pA != '\0')   /* line A (see text) */     {         *pB++ = *pA++;   /* line B (see text) */     }     *pB = '\0';          /* line C (see text) */     puts(strB);          /* show strB on screen */     return 0; }  
--------- end program 3.1 -------------------------------------      
In the above we start out by defining two character arrays of 80 characters each. Since these are globally defined, they are initialized to all '\0's first. Then, strA has the first 42 characters initialized to the string in quotes.  
Now, moving into the code, we declare two character pointers and show the string on the screen. We then "point" the pointer pA at strA. That is, by means of the assignment statement we copy the address of strA[0] into our variable pA. We now use puts() to show that which is pointed to by pA on the screen. Consider here that the function prototype for puts() is:  
    int puts(const char *s);  
For the moment, ignore the const. The parameter passed to puts() is a pointer, that is the value of a pointer (since all parameters in C are passed by value), and the value of a pointer is the address to which it points, or, simply, an address. Thus when we write puts(strA); as we have seen, we are passing the address of strA[0].  
Similarly, when we write puts(pA); we are passing the same address, since we have set pA = strA;  
 
16 
Given that, follow the code down to the while() statement on line A. Line A states:  
While the character pointed to by pA (i.e. *pA) is not a nul character (i.e. the terminating '\0'), do the following:  
Line B states: copy the character pointed to by pA to the space pointed to by pB, then increment pA so it points to the next character and pB so it points to the next space.  
When we have copied the last character, pA now points to the terminating nul character and the loop ends. However, we have not copied the nul character. And, by definition a string in C must be nul terminated. So, we add the nul character with line C.  
It is very educational to run this program with your debugger while watching strA, strB, pA and pB and single stepping through the program. It is even more educational if instead of simply defining strB[] as has been done above, initialize it also with something like:  
    strB[80] = "12345678901234567890123456789012345678901234567890" 
where the number of digits used is greater than the length of strA and then repeat the single stepping procedure while watching the above variables. Give these things a try!  
Getting back to the prototype for puts() for a moment, the "const" used as a parameter modifier informs the user that the function will not modify the string pointed to by s, i.e. it will treat that string as a constant.  
Of course, what the above program illustrates is a simple way of copying a string. After playing with the above until you have a good understanding of what is happening, we can proceed to creating our own replacement for the standard strcpy() that comes with C. It might look like:  
   char *my_strcpy(char *destination, char *source)    {        char *p = destination;        while (*source != '\0')        {            *p++ = *source++;        }        *p = '\0';        return destination;    }    
In this case, I have followed the practice used in the standard routine of returning a pointer to the destination.  
Again, the function is designed to accept the values of two character pointers, i.e. addresses, and thus in the previous program we could write:  
 
17  
    int main(void)     {         my_strcpy(strB, strA);         puts(strB);     }     
I have deviated slightly from the form used in standard C which would have the prototype:  
    char *my_strcpy(char *destination, const char *source);   
Here the "const" modifier is used to assure the user that the function will not modify the contents pointed to by the source pointer. You can prove this by modifying the function above, and its prototype, to include the "const" modifier as shown. Then, within the function you can add a statement which attempts to change the contents of that which is pointed to by source, such as:  
    *source = 'X'; 
which would normally change the first character of the string to an X. The const modifier should cause your compiler to catch this as an error. Try it and see.  
Now, let's consider some of the things the above examples have shown us. First off, consider the fact that *ptr++ is to be interpreted as returning the value pointed to by ptr and then incrementing the pointer value. This has to do with the precedence of the operators. Were we to write (*ptr)++ we would increment, not the pointer, but that which the pointer points to! i.e. if used on the first character of the above example string the 'T' would be incremented to a 'U'. You can write some simple example code to illustrate this.  
Recall again that a string is nothing more than an array of characters, with the last character being a '\0'. What we have done above is deal with copying an array. It happens to be an array of characters but the technique could be applied to an array of integers, doubles, etc. In those cases, however, we would not be dealing with strings and hence the end of the array would not be marked with a special value like the nul character. We could implement a version that relied on a special value to identify the end. For example, we could copy an array of positive integers by marking the end with a negative integer. On the other hand, it is more usual that when we write a function to copy an array of items other than strings we pass the function the number of items to be copied as well as the address of the array, e.g. something like the following prototype might indicate:  
    void int_copy(int *ptrA, int *ptrB, int nbr); 
where nbr is the number of integers to be copied. You might want to play with this idea and create an array of integers and see if you can write the function int_copy() and make it work.  
 
18 
This permits using functions to manipulate large arrays. For example, if we have an array of 5000 integers that we want to manipulate with a function, we need only pass to that function the address of the array (and any auxiliary information such as nbr above, depending on what we are doing). The array itself does not get passed, i.e. the whole array is not copied and put on the stack before calling the function, only its address is sent.  
This is different from passing, say an integer, to a function. When we pass an integer we make a copy of the integer, i.e. get its value and put it on the stack. Within the function any manipulation of the value passed can in no way effect the original integer. But, with arrays and pointers we can pass the address of the variable and hence manipulate the values of the original variables.  